Public Disclosure Authorized

Document of

The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 65693-NP

PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED CREDIT

Public Disclosure Authorized

IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 14.2 MILLION
(US$22 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
AND A
PROPOSED GRANT
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 11.7 MILLION
(US$18 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
TO

Public Disclosure Authorized

NEPAL
FOR A
SUNAULA HAZAR DIN - COMMUNITY ACTION FOR NUTRITION PROJECT
May 29, 2012

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective
Currency Unit
79.71NR
US$

=
=
=

=

March 6, 2012)

Nepalese Rupees
US$1
SDR 1

FISCAL YEAR
July 16
July 15
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AIDS
ARCS
BMI
CA
CAC

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
Audit Report Compliance System
Body Mass Index
Constituent Assembly
Citizen Awareness Center

MOAD
MOE
MOF
MOHP
MOFALD

CCT
DAG
DDC
DHS

Conditional Cash Transfer
Dis-Advantaged Group
District Development Committee
Demographic and Health Survey

NAGA
NCB
NDHS
NFSSC

DPMAS

District Poverty Monitoring and Analysis

NLSS

Nutrition Assessment and Gap Analysis
National Competitive Bidding
Nepal Demographic and Health Survey
Nutrition and Food Security Steering
Committee
Nepal Living Standard Survey

MSNP
NGO

Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan
Non Government Organization

NNG
NPC
OAG

Nepal Nutrition Group
National Planning Commission
Office of the Auditor General

OM
ORS
PAD
PDO
PMAS
PMT

Operations Manual
Oral Rehydration Solution
Project Appraisal Document
Project Development Objective
Poverty Monitoring and Analysis System
Project Management Team
Project Coordination Committee
Quality Assurance
Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiative
South Asia Food and Nutrition Security

Ministry of Agricultural Development
Ministry of Education
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Health and Population
Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local
Development

System

DTCO
ESRSM
FCHV
FM
GAFSP

District Treasury Controller Office
Environmental and Social Risk Screening
and Management
Female Community Health Volunteer
Financial Management
Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program

GDP
GON
HIV
HKI
HNP
IBRD

Gross Domestic Product
Government of Nepal
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Helen Keller International
Health, Nutrition and Population
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development

ICB
IDA
IFA
10C

International Competitive Bidding
International Development Association
Iron and Folic Acid
Incremental Operating Costs

PCC
QA
RRNI
SAFANSI

IP
IPR
ISN
IYCF
KAP
LDO
LGCDP

Indigenous People
Implementation Progress Report
Interim Strategy Note
Infant and Young Child Feeding
Knowledge Attitudes and Practices
Local Development Officer
Local Governance and Community

SBA
SIL
SUN
SOE
TA
TFR
UNFPA

Initiative

11

Skilled Birth Attendant
Specific Investment Loan
Scaling Up Nutrition
Statement of Expenditures
Technical Assistance
Total Fertility Rate
United Nations Populations Fund

LNS
MDG

Development Program
Lancet Nutrition Series
Millennium Development Goal

UNICEF
USAID

M&E
MMR
MNP

Monitoring and Evaluation
Maternal Mortality Ratio
Micro Nutrient Powder

VDC
WFP
WHO

Regional Vice President:
Country Director:
Sector Director:
Sector Manager:
Task Team Leader:

United Nations Children's Education Fund
United States Agency for International
Development
Village Development Committee
World Food Program
World Health Organization

Isabel M. Guerrero
Ellen A. Goldstein
Amit Dar (Acting)
Julie McLaughlin
Albertus Voetberg

111

PAD DATA SHEET
Nepal
Nepal: Community Action for Nutrition Project (Sunaula HazarDin) (P125359)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
SOUTH ASIA
SASHN

Basic Information
Date:

29-May-2012

Sectors:

Health (25%), Primary education (25%), Sanitation (20%), Animal
production (20%), Public administration- Health (10%)

Country Director:

Ellen A. Goldstein

Themes:

Sector Manager/Director:

Julie McLaughlin/Amit Dar

Child health (30%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Population and
reproductive health (20%), Other rural development (20%), Social safety
nets (10%)

Project ID:

P125359

EA Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Lending Instrument:

Specific Investment Loan

Team Leader(s):

Albertus Voetberg

Joint IFC: No
Borrower: Ministry of Finance
Responsible Agency: Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development
Contact:

Mr Bodh Raj Niroula

Title:

Joint Secretary

Telephone No.:

(977-1) 553-6170

Email:

nbodhraj@gmail.com

Project Implementation Period:

Start Date: 01-Oct-2012

Expected Effectiveness Date:

30-Sep-2012

Expected Closing Date:

End Date: 31-Mar-2017

30-Jun-2017

Project Financing Data(US$M)
[ Loan
[X ]

[X]

[ ]

Credit

[ ]

Grant

Other

Guarantee

Proposed term: The credit has a final maturity of 40 years including a grace period of 10 years.
For Loans/Credits/Others
Total Project Cost (US$M):

40.00

Total Bank Financing (US$M):

40.00

Financing Source

Amount(US$M)

BORROWER/RECIPIENT

0.00

International Development Association (IDA)

40.00

Total

40.00

Expected Disbursements (in USD Million)
Fiscal Year

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

0000

0000

0000

Annual

1.50

5.50

7.50

11.50

8.00

6.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

iv

Cumulative

1.50

7.00

14.50

26.00

34.00

40.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Project Development Objective(s)
The Development Objective for the Project is to improve attitudes and practices known to improve nutritional outcomes of women of reproductive age and
children under the age of 2. Changes in attitudes and practices would address the key risk factors for child malnutrition and create demand for nutrition related
services and products. The supply of these services and products will be provided through existing public sector and donor-funded programs, the private sector
and, to a limited extent, financed through the Project.

Components
Component Name

Cost (USD Millions)

Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives at the community level.

34.86

Project Management, Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation.

5.14

Compliance
Policy
Does the project depart from the CAS in content or in other significant respects?

Yes [ ]

No [X]

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?

Yes [ ]

No [X]

Have these been approved by Bank management?

Yes[]

No [ ]

Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board?

Yes [ ]

No [X]

Does the project meet the Regional criteria for readiness for implementation?

Yes [X]

No

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project

Yes

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01

No

X

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04

X

Forests OP/BP 4.36

X

Pest Management OP 4.09

X

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11

X

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10

X

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12

X

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37

X

Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50

X

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60

X

Legal Covenants
Name

Recurrent

Due Date

Frequency

Project Management Team

Description of Covenant
The Recipient shall establish by not later than thirty (30) days after the signing of the Financing Agreement and thereafter maintain throughout the Project
implementation, a Project Management Team with an adequate number of key professionals with skills, qualifications, experience and terms of reference
satisfactory to the Association.
Name

Recurrent

Due Date

Project Steering Committee

Description of Covenant
V

Frequency

The Recipient shall establish by not later than thirty (30) days after the signing of the Financing Agreement and thereafter maintain throughout the Project
implementation a Project Steering Committee with functions and composition satisfactory to the Association, to be headed by a Project director.
Name

Recurrent

Due Date

Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committees

Frequency

31-Oct-2012

Description of Covenant
The Recipient shall ensure that a district or a village will not be eligible to participate in the Project until a RRNI approval mechanism has been established in
said district or village, with functions and composition satisfactory to the Association.

Conditions
Name

Type

Description of Condition

Team Composition
Bank Staff

Name

Title

Specialization

Unit

Bigyan B. Pradhan

Sr Financial Management

Financial Management

SARFM

Specialist
Maria E. Gracheva

Senior Operations Officer

Operations

SASHN

Mohammad Khalid Khan

Program Assistant

Program Assistant

SASHD

Albertus Voetberg

Lead Health Specialist

Team Lead

SASHN

Roshan Darshan Bajracharya

Senior Economist

Economic Management

SASEP

Kiran R. Baral

Senior Procurement Officer

Procurement

SARPS

Gayatri Acharya

Senior Economist

Agriculture and Sustainable

SASDA

Development

Venkatesh Sundararaman

Senior Economist

Economist, Education

SASED

Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi

Senior Human Development

Social Protection

SASSP

Specialist
Phoebe M. Folger

Operations Officer

Operations

SASHN

Tekabe Ayalew Belay

Sr Economist (Health)

Economist (Health)

SASHN

Drona Raj Ghimire

Environmental Specialist

Environmental Safeguards

SASDI

Hiramani Ghimire

Senior Governance Specialist

Governance

SASGP

Mohan Prasad Aryal

Operations Officer

Operations and Education

SASED

Silva Shrestha

Research Analyst

Water and Sanitation

SASDU

Luc Laviolette

Sr Nutrition Spec.

Nutrition

SASHN

Jasmine Rajbhandary

Social Protection Specialist

Social Protection

SASSP

Jaya Karki

Team Assistant

E T Temporary

SASHD

Shambhu Prasad Uprety

Procurement Specialist

Procurement

SARPS

Saurav Dev Bhatta

Senior Education Specialist

Education

SASED

Bandita Sijapati

Consultant

Safeguards and Governance

SASDS

Manav Bhattarai

E T Consultant

Health

SASHN

Non Bank Staff

Vi

Name

Title

Office Phone

City

Locations
Country

First Administrative

Location

Planned

Division
Nepal

Districts of Parsa, Bara,

Rautahat, Sarlahi, Mahottari,
Dhanusa, Makwanpur,

Sindhuli, Ramechhap;
Siraha, Saptari, Sunsari,

Okhaldunga, Khotang and
Udayapur

Vii

Actual

Comments

NEPAL
Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
I.

STRATEGIC CONTEXT .................................................................................................

1

A. Country Context ......................

1..........................

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context............................................

1

C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes ...........

4

........

PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ...........................................................

4

A. PDO........................................................

4

B. Project Beneficiaries

II.

5

.................................................

C. PDO Level Results Indicators......................6....
III.

............ 6

PROJECT DESCRIPTION .........................................................................................
A. Project Components

.....................................

B. Project Financing

7

..........................................

Lending Instrument

........................................

Project Cost and Financing

........

..... 9
........ 9

............................................

9

C. Lessons Learned...........................................
IV .

......

IM PLEM ENTATION .....................................................................................................
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation

V.

....................

9
10

.....

........................................

C. Sustainability...................

7

.............................

10
11
12

KEY RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES......................................................13
A. Risk Ratings Summary Table ......................................
B. Overall Risk Rating Explanation

VI.

13
13

....................................

14

APPRAISAL SUMMARY .........................................................................................
A. Economic and Financial Analysis

..............................

.....

B. Technical ....................................................
C. Financial Management.....................
D. Procurement

15
.................

...........................................
viii

14

16

....... 17

E. Social (including Safeguards)

......................................

F. Environment..........................................

18

.........

18

Annex 1: Results Framework and Monitoring ....................................................................

19

Annex 2: Detailed Project Description ..................................................................................

22

Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements .............................................................................

28

Annex 4: Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF).............................................41
Annex 5: Implementation Support Plan ................................................................................

45

Annex 6: Project Objectives within the Causal Pathway for Malnutrition ......................

46

A nnex 7: G oal Tem plates .........................................................................................................

47

Annex 8: Districts selected for major nutrition projects.....................................................50
Annex 9: Relevant on-going/planned projects in Project districts......................................51
Annex 10: Economic and Financial Analysis .........................................................................

52

Annex 11: RRNI cycle, approval framework and reporting framework...........................59
Annex 12: Brief on GON's Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan..................................................61
Annex 13: Statement of Loans and Credits...........................................................................64
Annex 14: Nepal At A Glance ................................................................................................
MAP

ix

65

STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Country Context
Nepal emerged from a prolonged internal conflict with the signing of the
1.
Comprehensive Peace Accord in November 2006, laying out a roadmap to a lasting peace
and the construction of a new governance structure. Constituent Assembly (CA) elections
were peacefully held on April 10, 2008, creating the structure to draft a new constitution.
Political parties are currently engaged in reaching consensus on the country's future political and
administrative form. With an average annual per capita income of US$490 (WB, 2011) the
population of 26.6 million is culturally, ethnically and religiously diverse. There are three
distinct eco-zones- the mountains, the hills and the terai plains - running north to south and five
east-to-west development regions. Poverty has significantly declined from 310% in 2003/2004 to
250%in 20101/2011 and Nepal has reached its MDG 1 target related to the eradication of extreme
poverty - reducing poverty by half - ahead of time (WB, 2012). Higher poverty rates exist
among minorities, lower caste and certain tribal groups but inequality in consumption
expenditure has declined over the last 5 years (Nepal Living Standard Survey III - NLSS III).
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
2.
Nepal's health indicators have shown rapid and impressive improvements over the
last 10 years. The country is on track to reach the MDG targets related to Infant Mortality Rate,
Maternal Mortality Ratio and HIV/AIDS.
However, anticipated diminishing returns from
investments in on-going programs will slow down the progress unless additional interventions
are put in place. The Ministry of Health and Population, together with development partners and
other stakeholders are working closely through a Sector-wide Approach to keep Nepal on track
to reach these health related MDG targets by scaling up selected programs and putting in place
new initiatives. The proportion of deliveries attended by the skilled birth providers over the last
five years has nearly doubled, from 19% in 2006 to 36% in 2011 (DHS). The Maternal
Mortality Ratio (MMR) declined significantly from 530 per 100,000 live births in 1996 to 281 in
2006 (DHS 2006), a trend consistent with the data from 2009 which showed an MMR of 229 per
100,000 live births (Maternal Mortality and Morbidity Survey, 2009). The Total Fertility Rate
has declined from 3.1 (2006) to 2.6 (2011) and the percentage of children fully immunized
against major preventable illness increased from 83.5% (DHS 2006) to 87% (DHS 2011). From
2006 to 2011, the under five mortality has declined from 61 (DHS 2006) to 54 (DHS 2011) per
1,000 live births but the neonatal mortality has remained the same and the pace of improvement
in post neonatal and infant mortality has slowed down. The prevalence of HIV in Nepal is below
0.5%, the treatment success rate for tuberculosis treatment has increased to over 84% and only a
single death due to malaria has been reported during the first and second trimesters of FY
2010/11. Significant progress has been seen in reducing micronutrient deficiencies over the past
decade and consistent semi-annual Vitamin A supplementation to children 6-59 months covers
>90% of children. Similarly, the household consumption of adequately iodized salt has risen to
almost 80% and the iron and folic acid supplementation and de-worming during pregnancy has
made progress (NDHS 2011).
3.
In contrast to these improvements in health indicators, Nepal is not on track to
reach the MDG Ic target - to reduce the rate of malnutrition by half - and has a very high

1

rate of child malnutrition with 46.7% of children under five being stunted, 15.1% being
wasted and 36.3% being underweight (NLSS III, 2010/11). Although there is a declining
trend compared to the rates 5 years ago, these rates are still alarmingly high. The economic costs
of malnutrition are very high - an estimated 2-3% of GPD (US$250 to 375 million) is lost every
year in Nepal due to vitamin and mineral deficiencies alone. Improving nutrition contributes to
productivity, economic development, and poverty reduction by improving physical work
capacity, cognitive development, school performance, and by reducing disease and mortality.
The window of opportunity for improving nutrition is small - the 1000 days from the first day of
pregnancy through the first two years of life. The damage to physical growth, brain
development, and human capital formation that occurs during this period due to inadequate
nutrition is extensive and largely irreversible. The main focus in Nepal in improving nutrition
therefore is to accelerate the reduction of child malnutrition. Interventions must therefore focus
on the risk factors that influence nutritional outcomes during this critical period.
4.
In general, for an individual woman or child, the basic causes of maternal and child
malnutrition are: insufficient intake and absorption of nutrients, and excessive energy
expenditure. The risk factors for insufficient intake of nutrients include: poor economic and
social access to food, lack of knowledge about the nutritious value of foods and which foods are
required at specific times (e.g. pregnancy, young children), poor feeding practices for children,
gender dynamics that dictate that women should eat last and least, cultural beliefs about eating
down during pregnancy and the need to limit weight gain to avoid having large babies and thus
increase the risk of complicated delivery, smoking during pregnancy and indoor air pollution
during pregnancy which reduce the capacity of blood to carry oxygen to body tissues. Similarly,
insufficient weight gain before and during pregnancy and adolescent pregnancies limit the
availability of nutrients to the foetus, because the mother and foetus are competing for nutrients.
The risk factors for insufficient absorption of nutrients include: poor hygiene and environmental
sanitation that cause diarrhea and other infections that limit the gut's ability to absorb nutrients,
the presence in the diet of certain "anti-nutrients" such as phytates which bind with iron and limit
its absorption in the body and infections with parasites (e.g. helminths) that compete with the
host's body for nutrients. The risk factors for excessive energy expenditure relate to the
metabolic rate increases caused by infections, and excessive physical workloads of women
before and during pregnancy.
5.
In Nepal, these risk factors for young child malnutrition emerge at an early stage in
the life-cycle. Almost one in five (18.2%) women of reproductive age in Nepal has chronic
energy deficiency (Body Mass Index <18.5)1, compromising the additional energy requirements
during pregnancy. There is significant cultural and family pressure to marry and give birth at an
early age in Nepal. The median age at first birth has remained constant around 20 years of age
over the 2001, 2006 and 2011 Nepal Demographic and Health Surveys, evidence that social and
cultural attitudes regarding early childbearing continue to be prevalent. It is estimated that some
12 to 16% of children in Nepal are born with a low birth weight. Other prevalent risk factors
include anemia among pregnant women, excessive physical workloads, indoor air pollution and
smoking during pregnancy, poor hygienic practices and, related, frequent episodes of illnesses
such as diarrhea.
Body Mass Index is defined as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters. Normal
weight is
defined as a BMI of 19.8-26
1

2

6.
Current infant and young child care practices, from immediately after birth and up
to the age of 24 months, point to the next set of risk factors for child stunting. Particular
problems in Nepal are low levels of early initiation of breastfeeding and the either early or late
introduction of complementary feeding with a low quality complementary feeding diet.
Exclusive breastfeeding rates declined between 2001 and 2006 but improved significantly
between 2006 and 2011.
The Lancet Nutrition Series (LNS)2 calculated that quality
implementation of breastfeeding and complementary feeding interventions (possibly including
supplementary food) could reduce infant mortality and stunting at 12 months by 11.6% and
19.8% respectively. Delays in health care seeking behavior often results in more serious and
prolonged conditions among children, taking an unnecessarily heavy toll on their nutritional
status. Young children in Nepal suffer from frequent infections such as diarrhea and too often
care takers do not know how to properly treat diarrhea, as witnessed by the very low rates (less
than 10 per cent) of utilization of zinc with oral rehydration solution (ORS) to treat diarrhea.
7.
Community - wide factors constitute risks for malnutrition that are independent
from the life-cycle. The availability of an appropriate variety of food products is problematic in
a number of districts, as is the accessibility in terms of the costs of food items. Poor access to
safe drinking water and poor hygiene and sanitation practices contribute to the disease burden of
communities with a negative impact on nutritional status, especially among children. Cultural
beliefs and practices add important elements to the wide array of factors that perpetuate the
intergenerational problem of malnutrition in Nepal. Also, despite improvements in female
education in Nepal, the level of educational attainment is still a significant factor for malnutrition
in Nepal (NLSS III, 2010/2011). There is a strong positive correlation between mothers'
educational attainment and the nutritional status of her children.
8.
To address the range and variety of risk factors described above requires
coordinated action and resources from various sectors, agencies and actors, including
communities. The Nepal Food Crisis Response program was initiated in 2008 as a response to
soaring food prices and included support to public works programs, agriculture inputs and social
protection. The program used the strength of community organizations to implement its
programs quickly. The food security status of severely food insecure areas has considerably
improved but the need to focus on nutrition remains critically important. The Nepal MultiSectoral Nutrition Plan (MSNP) represents Nepal's intention to address this requisite. The
MSNP has recently been finalized, detailing the roles of the Ministry of Health and Population,
the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Physical Planning and Works, the Ministry of
Agricultural Development, and the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development, under
the leadership of the National Planning Commission, in this effort. This planning framework is
the result of collaboration among a wide range of stakeholders and sectors 3 . At the same time
external development partners, through the Nepal Nutrition Group (NNG) and the Food Security
Group, have improved the coordination of their interventions and analytical work. A number of
The Lancet, "Maternal and Child Undernutrition," Special Series, January, 2008
The key stakeholders in Food and Nutrition Security in Nepal, besides GON, include, but are not restricted to,
ADB, AusAID, DflD, EU, FAO, Hellen Keller International, IFAD, JICA, Jhpiego, the Micronutrient Initiative,
Save the Children Nepal, SDC, SNV, TUFT University, UNDP, UNICEF, USAID, WFP, WHO, and The World
Bank
2

3

nutrition and nutrition related projects are under preparation in parallel, the main ones being the
USAID funded Suaahara Project and Feed the Future Project, the Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) financed Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project and a large
project by Heifer International working with small scale farmers. A list of on-going and planned
projects in the area of Food and Nutrition Security in project districts is provided in Annex 9.
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes
9.
The overarching goal of the Bank's Nepal Interim Strategy Note (ISN, Report No.
63381- NP, 2011) is to support the Government of Nepal to build a peaceful, prosperous
and just Nepal. The Project will contribute to the higher level objective of the third pillar of the
ISN Promoting Access to Better Quality Service and the nutrition indicators under this pillar.
The Project will also support Nepal in its efforts to reach its MDG Ic target - to reduce the rate
of malnutrition by half, consistent with the World Bank's endorsement of the Framework for
Action for Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN).
10.
The Project is also consistent with the World Bank's South Asia Regional Assistance
Strategy (RAS) for Nutrition. The Project will interface with all the Ministries that are
participating in the delivery of the multi-sectoral plan of action, working in close coordination
with the National Planning Commission and directly through the Ministry of Federal Affairs and
Local Development (MOFALD). The World Bank South Asia RAS calls for inter-sectoral
approaches to address nutrition within Bank operations, focusing on areas of Bank comparative
advantages to better serve and support client countries to implement comprehensive programs
that integrate critical nutrition-sensitive actions in multiple sectors.

II.

PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
A. PDO
11.
The Development Objective for the Project is to improve attitudes and practices
known to improve nutritional outcomes of women of reproductive age and children under
the age of 2. Changes in attitudes and practices will address the key risk factors for child
malnutrition and create demand for nutrition related services and products. The supply of these
services and products will be provided through existing public sector and donor-funded
programs, the private sector and, to a limited extent, financed through the Project.
12.
Some of the targeted changes in practices would not necessarily result in improved
nutritional outcomes during the project period since they address risk factors whose
mitigation only delivers returns - impact - over a longer period. Postponing the age of first
pregnancy, keeping girls in school and child spacing are examples of such practices. The Project
Development Objective indicators, therefore, do not focus on impact but on changes in those
attitudes and practices known to affect nutritional outcomes. The changes the Project aims to
bring about are situated in the casual pathway for malnutrition as illustrated in Annex 6.
13.
Targeted populations will choose from a "menu" of attitudes and practices to be
improved that are most relevant for their specific situation. Depending on the choice, results

4

at community level will include improved hygiene practices (hand-washing and use of latrines);
reduced smoking during pregnancy; reduced indoor air pollution; improved safety of drinking
water; continued schooling for girls; delayed age of first pregnancy until at least the age of 20;
improved dietary intake and diversity during pregnancy; increased consumption of micronutrient supplements during pregnancy; improved breastfeeding practices, improved feeding
practices for children aged 6 to 24 months (frequency, micronutrient intake, continued feeding
during illness etc.). The complete menu of "goals" is reflected in Annex 7.
14.
The Project is designed primarily to address the risk factors for chronic
malnutrition although Nepal has high levels of both chronic malnutrition (stunting and
micronutrient deficiencies) as well as acute malnutrition (wasting). This focus was chosen
because stunting reduction is the main focus of the Government of Nepal's Multi-Sectoral
Nutrition Plan to which this project is aligned. This is technically sound because chronic
malnutrition limits the development potential and future productivity of three times more
children in Nepal than does acute malnutrition and the effects of chronic malnutrition are severe.
Various forms of chronic malnutrition are associated with at least 30% of child deaths and with
significant cognitive impairment (up to 25 IQ points loss when young children's diets are
deficient in iron), leading to reductions in learning ability and productivity losses in adulthood.
The interventions required to address acute malnutrition, such as community and facility based
management of acute malnutrition are supported in parallel through the IDA financed Second
HNP and HIV/AIDS Project.
15.
The focus of the Project is on the period of conception up to the age of 24 months the First Thousand Days - since damage to physical growth, brain development, and human
capital formation that occurs during this period due to inadequate nutrition is extensive and
largely irreversible. Secondly, the increase in the prevalence of chronic malnutrition in Nepal is
especially pronounced in the period from birth up the age of 24 months (NLSS III preliminary
data).
B. Project Beneficiaries
16.
The Project will support a life-cycle approach, targeting the specific populations
that are relevant to achieving the PDO: (1) girls and young women between 15 and 25 years
of age; (2) pregnant women and women who may want to become pregnant in the next 6 months;
(3) children 0-6 months of age and their caretakers; (4) children 6-24 months of age and their
caretakers; and (5) communities involved in community-wide nutrition related interventions
(such as hygiene, safe drinking water, sanitation, etc). Project interventions will be supported in
15 districts, which have been selected on the basis of a) stunting levels; b) population size; c)
poverty levels; and d) the absence of interventions by other partners that focus on social
mobilization.
Within the selected districts, the Project will target 25% of the most
disadvantaged Village Development Committees (VDCs), in total approximately 1,100 VDCs,

The project districts are in the central Terai: Parsa, Bara, Rautahat, Sarlahi, Mahottari, and Dhanusa; in the Central
Hills: Makwanpur, Sindhuli and Ramechhap; in the Eastern Terai: Siraha, Saptari, and Sunsari; in the Eastern Hills:
Okhaldunga, Khotang and Udayapur.
4

5

and operate in all wards of the selected VDCs 5 . The criteria for the selection of VDCs will
follow the six indicators in use by MOFALD for the Disadvantaged Group (DAG) classification,
relating to 1) food sufficiency of less than 3 months, 2) the presence of marginalized groups, 3)
lack of access to basic services, 4) the lack of representation/participation of/by women, Dalits
and janajati in decision-making bodies, 5) the prevalence of gender discrimination and 6) the
presence of vulnerable groups. The total population in the Project districts is about eight million
people in 1.5 million households (Census 2011), and representing 30% of the total population of
Nepal.
17.
Although rates of stunting are highest in the mountain and hill districts, the Terai is
most affected in terms of the overall numbers of women and children (see Figure 1 below).
Therefore, the Project will focus on the most populated areas in order to have the maximum
impact.
Figure 1: Number of women and children affected by malnutrition ('000s)
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200 1,000 HTera

800

MNHS
I

600
400

Mountains

-

200
0
Anemia in
women

Low BMI
among
women

Anemia
among U-5

Stunting
among U-5

Source: World Bank, "Accelerating progress in reducing maternal and child under-nutrition in Nepal," 2011

C. PDO Level Results Indicators
18.
The PDO level indicators will track improvements in: a) family planning practices of
girls and young women aged 15-25 years; b) practices of pregnant women regarding iron and
folic acid supplementation; c) breastfeeding practices of mothers with children 0-6 months of
age; d) child feeding practices of households with children 6 to 24 months of age; e) attitude of
community members towards the importance of keeping girls school until age 20; f) attitude of
community members towards the importance of reducing indoor air pollution and g) attitudes of
pregnant women towards their dietary needs. Annex 1 provides the complete Results
Framework, including a description of key attitudes and practices that will be measured and how
monitoring and evaluation under the project will be designed and implemented.

5

Nepal has 75 districts, districts are divided in a number of VDCs, depending on the population size. There are
3914 VDCs nationwide and every VDC has 9 wards. Below the ward level are settlements.

6

III.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
19.
The Project will roll out a social mobilization initiative through a community-driven
"Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiative" (RRNI) where each ward in a selected VDC will
commit to a series of pre-defined nutrition relevant goals, each to be met within a 100-day
period. The achievement of the goals will be the responsibility of RRNI teams, one for each
ward, supported by a coach who will support all RRNI teams in one VDC.
20.
The Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives approach will be introduced in two
VDCs prior to the start of the Project. The lessons learned from this early introduction of the
RRNI approach will be incorporated into a final Operations Manual (OM). It will then be rolled
out under the Project in a sequenced manner across the 15 project districts.
21.
The Project does not operate in isolation and a range of relevant services, projects
and resources are already available in all selected districts. These include services from all
public sectors, other Bank financed projects (the Poverty Alleviation Fund, the Social Safety
Nets project, the Rural Water and Sanitation project), projects by UN agencies (WFP, UNICEF,
UNFPA) and International NGOs (HKI, Heifer International), resources from GON district block
grants and grants under the Local Governance and Community Development Program (LGCDP).
The selected coaches working in a specific district will, in close collaboration with the district
Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee (NFSSC), make an inventory of all of these
available services, projects and resources (the district map) prior to the initiation of RRNIs in the
district in order to be able to provide this information to the communities so as to maximize the
potential benefits from these resources.
22.
Other project designs have been considered but regarded as less appropriate. A
project using a variety of conditional cash transfers (CCTs) was contemplated. However, this
approach was eventually rejected as beneficiaries of existing cash transfers in Nepal do not
(fully) match the intended target groups necessary to achieve the PDO, and therefore, additional
cash transfer mechanisms would need to be created. Obtaining firm assurances of continued
financial resources to support these additional entitlements after the project would be highly
unlikely and thus would pose a risk to the sustainability of project activities. Another option
considered was to implement the project through the Ministry of Health and Population
(MOHP). However, this would add little value since the MOHP already assumes responsibility
6
for implementing all recommended nutrition related programs and the required scaling up of
some of these programs is already supported by IDA through the Second HNP and HIV/AIDS
Project. Lastly, the possibility of a project supporting nutrition relevant service delivery by a
range of implementing agencies was also considered but found to be less relevant as it would not
comprehensively address the demand side and the social determinants of malnutrition.
A. Project Components
23.
Component 1 (estimated US$34.86 million): Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives
at the ward level. This component will support the entire RRNI process. It will start at a Ward
6

World Bank, "Accelerating progress in reducing maternal and child under-nutrition in Nepal," 2011

7

Citizen Forum where, invited by the LGCDP social mobilizer, key nutrition challenges of the
community will be discussed. Assisted by a coach at the ward level, the Ward Citizen Forum
will select a nutrition relevant goal from a menu of goals (see Annex 7). A RRNI team will be
formed at the ward level that will set an appropriate and realistic target for meeting the goal and
pledge to achieve the goal within a 100-day period by mobilizing the community and finding the
best approach to achieving the target in their particular context. The RRNI team will prepare a
Work Plan which will outline the needed inputs to achieve the goal and enter into a Grant
Agreement with the VDC, stipulating that the Work Plan will be implemented in accordance
with the provisions and guidelines stipulated in the Operations Manual.
24.
The Work Plan might require physical inputs and/or inputs by the community such
as reaching out to the selected target groups in a variety of ways to change critical behaviors and
practices that affect nutrition outcomes. The Work Plan will be submitted for review to the
NFSSC at the VDC level if the total value is below US$1,000 equivalent and to the NFSSC at
the DDC level if the total value is between US$1,000 and the maximum of US$3,000 equivalent.
Depending on the needs outlined in the Work Plan, the NFSSCs will be tasked to ensure that the
necessary inputs are provided to the RRNI team. This will entail coordinating inputs from
various relevant agencies, such as Health and Population, Education, and Agricultural
Development, etc. Once the inputs are provided to the ward, the 100-day RRNI will begin.
25.
There will be a mid-term assessment by the RRNI team with assistance from the
coach and an end-of the 100 days initiative evaluation by the team of whether it was able to
meet the goal and a presentation of the results to the Ward Citizen Forum. At the same occasion,
the RRNI team will account for the use of inputs, financial or otherwise, and the end-of the 100
days initiative evaluation will effectively serve as a public audit of the initiative as well.
Modalities for sustaining and expanding the achievement will be an important topic during the
evaluation of the 100 days RRNI.
26.
Results of the initiatives will be recorded and maintained by NFSSCs and lessons of
successful and innovative projects will be disseminated to other communities to ensure
maximum learning. Similarly, unsuccessful initiatives will be reviewed in order to extract
valuable lessons for other communities in order to continue making improvements, possibly
refining RRI goals. Each ward will be encouraged to carry out several RRNIs each year,
focusing on different goals.
27.
Component 2 (estimated US$5.14 million): Project Management, Capacity Building,
Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will provide support for the implementation of
Component 1 under three sub-components: (i) capacity enhancement of the Project Management
Team, including Cluster Units, and NFSSCs, as well as of coaches and social mobilizers.
NFSSCs at DDC and VDC levels will receive training and project management support to ensure
that they are able to review and process work plans and secure necessary supplies at the village
level. Support to NFSSCs at DDC and VDC levels will go beyond Project specific activities and
include support in coordinated planning and budgeting for nutrition relevant activities across
sectors to be incorporated in the district block grants. Coaches at the VDC level will receive
appropriate training and materials on the RRNI process in order to ensure high quality of work
plans. The training and the development of the materials will be contracted to a consultancy

8

firm; (ii) providing necessary inputs (consultants, goods and operating costs) for effective project
management at national, DDC and VDC levels; and (iii) ensuring monitoring and evaluation of
the Project, including the evaluation of the RRNI process through routine and third-party
monitoring. This includes financing of a mid-line and end-line survey as well as financing
annual conferences (sponsored by the National Planning Commission) where findings and
innovations of successful RRNI teams will be presented. as well as whether the expected
outcomes of the Rapid Results initiatives were achieved. Evaluation of the program is one of the
primary aims during implementation. Given that the evaluation is best achieved when the
interventions are being designed, the GON and the Bank team have agreed to try and employ an
experimental design for project roll-out to allow for a rigorous evaluation of program impacts.
B. Project Financing
Lending Instrument
28.
The Lending Instrument for the Project is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), with a
total amount of US$40 million to be financed by an IDA Credit of US$22 million and an IDA
Grant of US$18 million. The Project will be implemented over a period of 5 years with a
Closing Date of June 30, 2017.
Project Cost and Financing
29.
The estimated project costs are provided in Table 1 below, and detailed costs are
attached as part of Annex 2. Resources under two existing Trust Funds, the AusAID financed
SUNITA Trust Fund and the Partnership for Transparency Fund will finance specific activities
related to the Project such as the baseline survey, the early introduction of the RRNI approach,
the training of the coaches and the third party monitoring.
Table 1: Estimated Total Project Costs
Project Components
1.Rapid results initiatives
2.Capacity enhancement/management

Project cost
34.86
5.14

Total Project Costs
Total Financing Required

40.00
40.00

IDA Financing
34.86
5.14
40.00
40.00

% Financing
100
100
100

C. Lessons Learned
30.
The project design builds on the lessons of the rapid results approach which has been
used in a number of countries from Nicaragua to help improve agricultural yields, to Rwanda
where two villages doubled the number of attended births in less than 100 days. In Madagascar,
four districts quintupled the use of family planning services in 50 days, and the Health Ministry
then began the program on a national scale. Kenya is using rapid results in virtually all its
ministries; one campaign circumcised 40,000 men in two months, an important intervention for
HIV/AIDS prevention. Villages in Ghana, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Eritrea and other countries have
used Rapid Results to improve local infrastructure as well - digging wells, constructing bridges
and roads, building schools. The key to the success of the rapid results approach is the

9

motivation and confidence that are created by defining and monitoring results in short periods
and the strong sense of community mobilization that results. In all these cases, the main barrier
to achieving development results was the need to change behaviors, which is the challenge also
faced in Nepal in addressing malnutrition. An important lesson from the experiences of these
countries in implementing the rapid results approach has been the critical need to have well
trained coaches who in turn enable communities to select the best members for the RRNI teams
as well as to select the most appropriate goals and set realistic targets. This lesson is well-taken
by the Project which plans to hire and train coaches throughout project implementation and to
ensure that they have the necessary support in terms of materials and information. The rapid
results approach is new to Nepal but there is indication that it should also work in the Nepali
context, given the strong track record in Nepal of community-based development. The challenge
of the project is that it will be carried out on a much larger scale than other rapid results
initiatives have been so far. To mitigate this risk, the Project will be phased in slowly and
gradually expanding to all 15 districts.

IV.

IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
31.
The National Planning Commission (NPC) will provide policy support in
accordance with its mandate to coordinate Nepal's multi-secoral efforts in Food and
Nutrition Security. The MOFALD will be the main implementing agency. There will be a
regular information sharing mechanism between the NPC and MOFALD.
Project
implementation at MOFALD will be headed by a Project Director at the level of Joint Secretary.
Under his leadership, a Project Management Team (PMT) will include a Project Coordinator at
the level of Under-Secretary, an Accounts Officer who will be primarily responsible for ensuring
efficient flow of funds for the project and for financial reporting to the Government and the
Bank, a Monitoring & Evaluation Officer, a Social Mobilization Expert and a Procurement
Expert. Besides the Project Management Team there will be other administrative and logistics
staff to support the PMT as and when necessary.
32.
A Project Coordination Committee, headed by a Joint Secretary (the Project
Director) will be established, consisting of the Project Management Team and representatives
from the line ministries of the health, education, agriculture sectors and other relevant agencies.
This Committee will assist in addressing project specific issues related to policy dialogue and
intersectoral coordination.
33.
At the Regional level, support will be provided to the LGCDP Cluster units
responsible for districts where the Project will be implemented. At the district level, support
will be provided by the NFSSCs which will be responsible for reviewing RRNI Work Plans and
coordinating the supply of necessary inputs for the RRNIs.
34.
The Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives will use separate grants to the 15
districts for the purpose of the project to finance demand based sub-projects, relying on the
established social mobilization mechanism within MOFALD's LGCDP. The implementation
mechanism will focus on nutrition issues, through the involvement of NFSSCs at the district and
10

village levels. MOFALD will prepare the work program for this project under a separate budget
heading that will appear in the government's budget (Red Book). The Project will have its own
flow of funds mechanism under a separate budget line item. The NFSSCs will be charged to
review Work Plans submitted by wards and to ensure that the necessary inputs are secured. In
case inputs can be supplied through public sector programs this will entail NFSSCs coordinating
their work closely with the district level representatives of the relevant Ministries, including
Health and Population, Education and Agricultural Development. It will also entail NFSSCs
facilitating a sub-project grant allocation for the RRNI to finance additional supplies through the
public sector, if needed, or to procure supplies from the private sector. Each NFSSC at the VDC
level will also coordinate closely with the coaches responsible for their VDCs to ensure that
project implementation is as efficient as possible. Similarly, each coach will work closely with
the Ward Citizen Forums to ensure that the RRNI Work Plans meet the selection criteria,
including the composition of the RRNI team and the inclusion of eligible expenditures only, and
that the implementation of RRNIs is carried out in accordance with the Work Plan. An
Operations Manual (OM) for the RRNI Process to be developed will provide all the necessary
guidance and information to staff involved in implementation at all levels, from ward to the
central level. As a supplement to the OM, a simplified version of Guidelines for the
Communities will also be prepared, which will be produced in Nepali language. The OM will
also outline the responsibilities of staff at each level and the monitoring and reporting
requirements.
35.
A communications strategy is built into the Project. The Project Coordination
Committee (PCC) at the central level, including representatives from the various line ministries
and concerned agencies, will act as a platform for dissemination of information and advocacy
and political mobilization. The implementing agency will further communicate with these
ministries and other civil societies regularly by producing and distributing materials in English
and Nepali languages and acquainting them about the Project, its importance and its progress as
the Project gets implemented. At the ward level, the coaches and social mobilizers will be
involved in RRNI information and mobilization by organizing key meetings and broadcasting
through the local FM radios. This would encourage public participation by encouraging and
empowering households to engage in this project for better nutrition of their children and
women.
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation
36.
Monitoring of the Project will entail activities that ensure transparency,
accountability and inclusion. The monitoring indicators will be obtained from surveys and
from routine data on physical and financial outputs. Results monitoring will concentrate on
changes in attitudes and practices known to improve nutritional outcomes. A baseline survey
will be carried out before the start of Project implementation. In addition to the attitudes and
practices, the survey will also generate data on the intermediate outcomes such as the rate of
teenage pregnancies, Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) indicators, the Household Dietary
Diversity Score as well as outcome level indicators like the percentage of stunted children 0-24
months of age, and percentage of anemia in adolescent girls and pregnant women as baseline
statistics. The success of the Project will also be measured by the number, coverage and success
rates of the RRNIs.

11

37.
Support for the Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project will include regular
collection of data on the implementation of the Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives, data
on the behaviors and practices which the RRNIs are expected to change, as well as data on
the nutritional outcomes. There will be five aspects to the monitoring and evaluation
framework financed by the component. First, the costs of mid-term, and end-term surveys to
determine how key program indicators have changed during the course of project
implementation. In addition to these three discrete monitoring events, the Project will also
finance within year tracking surveys to assess developments in program areas, which will
provide supporting information to assess the process of change. Second, the component will
support third-party, independent verification of results of the RRNIs. This will also include an
ethnographic component, where qualitative information to learn about and comprehend the
cultural settings in which the program is placed and in an effort to appropriately reflect both the
knowledge and practices in these different settings. Third, the component will support the
overall evaluation of the project impacts. The GON and the Bank team have reached an
agreement to use an innovative design to allow for a rigorous impact of program outcomes.
Fourth, the component will finance learning events for coaches on a semi-annual basis in their
districts where they will be able to share their experiences and to learn about successful and
innovative projects. Finally, on an annual basis, there will also be a Nutrition Learning Forum
organized by the National Planning Commission where results of the project will be presented
and discussed, where innovative RRNIs and project lessons will be highlighted and where
selected communities will be honored for their special achievements.
38.
Beyond the monitoring of Project activities, support will also be provided to
strengthen the overall monitoring and evaluation system for nutrition indicators and
nutrition-related interventions in the districts. Through the support to NFSSCs nutrition related
information from the health sector, the education sector, the Ministry of Physical Planning and
Works, the Ministry of Agricultural Development and MOFALD will be linked with the District
Poverty Monitoring and Analysis System (DPMAS) at district level and with the Poverty
Monitoring and Analysis System (PMAS) at central level.
C. Sustainability
39.
The Project aims to sustainably change attitudes and practices of intended
beneficiaries so as to reduce risk factors for malnutrition. It is realized that a single RRNI in
critical areas may not be sufficient to arrive at a sustained change in norms of practices. Wards
will be encouraged to repeat some of the critical initiatives over the lifetime of the project, in
particular those related to early pregnancy and child spacing, the preparation for pregnancy,
smoking and indoor air pollution, hygiene, dietary diversity, infant feeding practices, including
early and exclusive breastfeeding, and early care seeking behavior. Sustaining and expanding
the achievements made during the 100 days initiatives will be a major topic for discussion with
the Ward Citizen Forum during the end-of initiative evaluations.
40.
The Project will help establish a sustained institutional mechanism for Food and
Nutrition Security - and the RRNI approach - in each VDC through training and the
financing of operational expenses. The training will include support in coordinated planning and

12

budgeting for nutrition relevant activities across sectors to be incorporated in the district block
grants as a sustainable source of funding beyond the Project period. The NFSSCs at district and
VDC level, as elaborated in Nepal's MSNP, will be provided with a standard training package
that is being elaborated by a number of Food and Nutrition Security stakeholders in Nepal, such
as the National Planning Commission, the Ministry of Agricultural Development, UNICEF,
HKI, WFP and Reach. In addition, the existing social mobilizers recruited under MOFALD's
LGCDP will be trained in the RRNI methodology.
41.
Members of the RRNI teams will be trained in the conduct of peer programs and
other social change methods7 in order to facilitate their work with their communities for the
purpose of reaching the selected goal. This training will also allow them to continue working as
agents of change in their communities after the RRNI has been completed.

V.

KEY RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES
A. Risk Ratings Summary Table
Risk

Rating

Stakeholder Risk

Low

Implementing Agency Risk
- Capacity

Substantial

- Governance

Substantial

Project Risk
- Design

Substantial

- Social and Environmental

Low

- Program and Donor

Low

- Delivery Monitoring and Sustainability

Substantial

Overall Implementation Risk

Substantial

B. Overall Risk Rating Explanation
42.
The overall risk for the Project is estimated to be Substantial, notably given the novelty
of the proposed approach in Nepal and the relatively weak capacity and governance
environment.

7 Examples

of social change programs include positive deviance, peer program, advocacy, behavior change
communication, and social marketing methods.

13

VI.

APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Economic and Financial Analysis
43.
Nutritional interventions contribute significantly to the reduction of child and
maternal mortality and physical and cognitive damages. Millions of mothers and children
die globally and millions more are permanently disabled by mental and physical damage due to
underlying causes of malnutrition early in life. The costs of irreversible physical and cognitive
damage that children face due to malnutrition by 24 months of age are very large, and the impact
of such damage has a strong intergenerational component. At the same time, there are wellproven interventions to reduce malnutrition available in Nepal. Recent analytical work
commissioned by the Bank 8 has reviewed the evidence for essential nutrition interventions and
provided the evidence base on what works for Nepal.
44.
Nutritional interventions are among the most cost-effective interventions to enhance
welfare and reduce poverty. In the Copenhagen Consensus 20089, a panel of renowned
economists, ranked five nutritional interventions among thirty proposals presented to answer the
question of the best way to advance global welfare. It ranked micronutrient supplements for
children including vitamin A and zinc supplementation first, micronutrient fortification including
iron and salt iodization third, de-worming and other nutrition programs at school sixth and
community based nutrition promotion as ninth. The ranking takes into account the benefit cost
ratio, feasibility and sustainability of the interventions. Investments in these interventions reduce
poverty by enhancing productivity, cognitive development, and school performance. There is
evidence showing the link between income/earning and nutritional status. At macro level,
malnutrition could cause a significant loss of national income. In countries with high level of
anemia, for instance, it is estimated to cause about 2% reduction in GDP. At the micro level,
malnutrition causes a significant reduction in earning: a percentage decrease in adult height
could result in up to 4% reduction in earnings. More importantly, improved nutrition will reduce
maternal and child mortality.
45.
Public investment in nutrition in Nepal, hence the Project, is justified both on equity
grounds and on the grounds of market failure resulting from externality and limited
information. Even when an investment in nutrition is worth making, there needs to be a well
argued case for public involvement in those investments. From an economics perspective, there
is a case from both an equity/poverty reduction perspective and market failure perspective that
justifies the Project. There are two equity considerations that justify public investment in
nutrition in Nepal. First, the burden of malnutrition falls disproportionately on the poor.
According to the 2010 household survey, malnutrition is concentrated among the rural residents,
households with illiterate women and the poorest. Moreover, the trend for the past decade shows
that while malnutrition has declined nationally, this reduction is concentrated among the richest
households. Hence, the fact that the poor are disproportionately affected by malnutrition is a
good reason for public intervention. Furthermore, it is well established in the literature on the
World Bank. 2012. Accelerating progress in reducing Maternal and Child Undernutrition in Nepal: A review of global
evidence of essential nutrition interventions for the Nepal Health Sector Plan II and Multisectoral Nutrition Plan.

9 http://www.copenhazenconsensus.com/Projects/Copenhazen%20Consensus%202008-1.aspx. For further reading
see Global crises, global solutions, edited by Bjorn Lomborg. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2004.

14

nutrition-poverty nexus that the poor are trapped in a low income - low nutrition equilibrium and
public intervention is essential to breaking this vicious cycle. Second, in an economy where
access to credit is limited, the opportunity to transfer assets inter temporally is limited especially
for the poor. This is true for Nepal (see Besley, Jain and Tsangarides, 2001). 10 Although the
returns to investments in nutrition are high and are common knowledge, such high return
investments are beyond the reach of the poor due to credit constraints that the poor face. Public
intervention can help relax such constraints facing the poor. Furthermore, people do not always
have full information on the presence of malnutrition, of the severity, of its consequences or on
ways to address it. Because growth faltering may be the norm, and micronutrient deficiencies
are not typically visible enough to be easily recognized, communities are often unaware of the
need to invest in improving the nutritional status of their children. The role of information is
even more critical because of the limited window of opportunity where the highest impact on
nutrition could be made. The benefit of improved nutrition accrues not only to the individual
making the investment but to the society at large as improved nutrition reduces the impact of
disease and improves national productivity. Such an absence of internalization of all the benefits
of one's investments results in underinvestment in nutrition relative to that which is socially
desirable.
B. Technical
46.
The Project builds on existing and upcoming nutrition programs in Nepal and fills an
important gap for demand side interventions in nutrition. By focusing mainly on demand
creation and community mobilization for nutrition-related behavior change, the Project
complements the supply side interventions that are financed through large programs such as the
Bank-financed health sector SWAp, investments in the education sector, poverty reduction
initiatives and the upcoming Nepal Agriculture and Food Security program. Any potential
overlap with the USAID-financed Suaahara and Feed the Future projects has been avoided as the
projects will work in a different set of districts.
47.
The Government of Nepal's MSNP describes target groups and prioritization and three
main outcomes to which the Project is well aligned. The priorities and target groups indicate a
focus on the first thousand days, the most deprived/most vulnerable, inclusive of all social
groups, and geographic inclusiveness. The three outcomes of the MSNP and the outputs to
which the Project is aligned are reflected in Annex 12.
48.
The results-orientation and the RRNI approach, allowing for context specific
interventions by communities, sets the stage for motivating and energizing communities. While
the Project will benefit from the successful track record of a similar approach in various sectors
and countries and from the motivation that community-driven development generates in
communities, by proposing a "menu" of possible goals for each RRNI, the Project will also be
focused specifically on the areas of behaviors which have been identified as those which need to
change in Nepal in order to improve nutrition outcomes. Importantly, the flexibility that is built
10

Besley, Timoth. Jain, Sanjay, and Tsangarides, Charalambos. 2001. "Household
participation in formal and informal
institutions in rural credit markets in developing countries: evidence from Nepal". Background paper prepared for World
Development Report 2001/2002.

15

into the design (i.e. communities decide how they will achieve the goals) will enable tailoring of
approaches to local cultural contexts. Through incremental scaling-up over time with robust
evaluation, the Project will be amenable to integrating lessons learned during the scaling-up.
49.
The Project is evidence-based, building on an extensive series of analytical products
prepared recently in Nepal, including evidence reviews, and on global evidence. For instance,
the goals related to the reduction of indoor air pollution and smoking during pregnancy are based
on evidence that indoor air pollution is associated with increased risks of low birth weight,
stillbirth and reduced mean birth weight. One of the reasons of this association is that carbon
monoxide reduces the capacity of blood to carry oxygen to body tissues, carbon monoxide
crosses the placental barrier, hemoglobin in fetal blood has ten times more affinity to bind carbon
monoxide than for adults and carbon monoxide elimination by the fetus is slower than by the
mother". Similarly, insufficient weight gain during pregnancy is associated with increased risk
of low birth weight, a diet consisting of predominantly staple foods is associated with increased
risk of malnutrition and a better educational attainment of the mother is associated with a
reduced risk of malnutrition of her children.
50.
The focus of the Project is consistent with a global consensus on the importance of the
"First Thousand Days" and will adopt a life-cycle approach in order to address the risk factors
that are relevant to the nutritional outcomes of the first thousand days. The menu of goals has
been set specifically to address the risk factors which can be reduced through community
mobilization and for which the evidence of impact on nutritional status is the strongest.
C. Financial Management
51.
A detailed financial management assessment carried out prior to appraisal has been
updated following appraisal. The Project will follow the government financial management
system with some customized design due to innovativeness of the Project and learning from the
good practices of other community based programs. The design of the funds flow arrangement
ensures that spending at the central, district and ward levels have sufficient control mechanisms
built into the system. A dedicated budget head will be created for this project to be reflected in
the government's budget. The spending authority will be delegated by the Finance Secretary to
the Secretary of the MOFALD who will then sub-delegate to the Joint Secretary (Project
Director). The Project Director will further delegate to the project Coordinator who be
accountable to prepare the detailed work program and budget for the project by coordinating
both at the central and the district level. Since the project is expected to start from FY2012/13,
the MOFALD will start preparing the work program and budget and discuss these with the
National Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. A Project Operations Manual will
be prepared, discussed and approved by the start of the project. A core staff comprising of at
least a Project Director, a Project Coordinator, a Finance Officer and a Procurement Officer will
be appointed prior to the start of the project. Based on some of the initial actions and decisions
by the government, a detailed financial management capacity assessment of selected districts
will be carried out by the MOFALD. As an implementing agency, MOFALD is currently
managing four Bank-financed projects, of which two projects - Rural Infrastructure and
Decentralization Project and the Social Safety Nets Project - are required to submit audit reports.
Pope et al, Epidemiol Rev, 2010;32:70-81

16

Although there are no outstanding audit reports from these projects, the audit report of the Social
Safety Nets Project for FY2009/10 and FY2010/11 are not yet acceptable due to outstanding
qualification related to providing opinion on expenditures incurred by the World Food Program
(WFP) which constitute almost 80% of the project expenditures. This issue must be resolved
before the Project is presented to the World Bank Board of Executive Directors. Based on
current assessment, the financial management risk is "Substantial".
D. Procurement
52.
At the ward level of selected VDCs, any services or products required for the
implementation of the RRNIs will be provided by the village level or district level NFSSC
depending on the value of the inputs required. As far as possible, NFSSCs will obtain most of
these inputs directly from various relevant agencies implementing public sector programs such as
Health and Population, Education, Agricultural Development, etc. If the necessary inputs cannot
be provided by the NFSSCs, the RRNI teams will obtain these from the private sector directly.
The other procurement needs of the project will be related to training, production of resource
materials (Operation Manual, simplified guidelines etc.) and surveys to be undertaken by the
Project Management Team at MOFALD.
53.
Procurement for the Project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank's
"Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services under IBRD Loans and
IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers" published by the Bank in January 2011, and
"Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and
Grants by World Bank Borrowers" published by the Bank in January 2011, and the provisions
stipulated in the legal agreements. For each contract to be financed under the Credit/Grant,
procurement methods or consultant selection methods, the estimated costs, prior review
requirements, and time frame are agreed between the Borrower and the Bank in the Procurement
Plan for the first 18 months of the project to be developed by the Borrower and cleared by the
Bank before project negotiations. The Procurement Plan will be updated at least annually or as
required to reflect the actual project implementation needs and improvements in institutional
capacity.
54.
The Project does not involve much procurement and also does not include high value
procurement. Most procurement activities will be carried out by the MOFALD. Procurement
activities envisaged under this project include procurement of small value goods, works for
repair and maintenance of physical facilities and consulting services. In order to smoothly
facilitate such small value procurement at community level, MOFALD will prepare an
Operations Manual containing procurement procedure/guidelines/standards/norms etc in line
with the set procedure being practiced under MOFALD. Procurement of laptop computers
(approx. 600 sets) required for MOFALD, DDCs and VDCs will be done at central level by the
PMT to achieve economy of scale. The computers procured will be distributed to these agencies
as per GoN standard procedures. Procurement of other goods including vehicles and motorbikes
will also be done by the PMT. With regard to consulting services, selection of service providers
(NGOs) for 15 districts and some other individual consultants will also be done at central level
by the PMT. Since MOFALD is the primary implementing agency and responsible for
managing overall procurement under the project to be done at district and community levels, its

17

procurement management capacity is the key for smooth project implementation. Currently
MOFALD, through its separate Project Offices and Divisions/Sections, is implementing three
projects (RAIDP, SSNP & HDSP), financed by the World Bank. On the basis of MOFALD's
demonstrated procurement management capacity in these projects, procurement risk is currently
estimated as "Substantial". The risk will be lowered, however, with the placement of a dedicated
procurement officer in the PMT (financed by the project), as well as defining clear and
simplified procurement procedures to be adopted under the project and regular capacity building
of the staff involved in procurement management.
E. Social (including Safeguards)
55.
The Project triggers the OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous People (IPs) safeguard policy. OP/BP
4.10 is triggered to ensure that any adverse effects of the project are avoided or minimized, and
that the indigenous people receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits. While
the whole Project has been designed to benefit vulnerable groups, including the IPs, it is not exante known whether the wards where the project will be implemented coincide with those where
there is a significant presence of IP groups. To ensure that any adverse effects of the Project are
avoided or minimized, and these groups are able to access project benefits which are also
culturally appropriate social and economic beneficial, the Environmental and Social Risk
Screening and Management Guidelines (ESRSM) developed for the project includes measures
for these vulnerable groups which will help mitigate these risks and impacts, and enhance project
benefits to these groups.
56.
In addition to mitigating the risks and any potential negative impact of the Project, the
ESRSM guidelines also include activities, processes for public consultation and participation,
monitoring mechanisms, to enhance project benefits to communities, including vulnerable
groups, through the design and implementation of sub-project activities. The final guidelines
have been uploaded prior to Negotiations. The guidelines will be disclosed in Nepali and
English by the MOFALD, and in English at the World Bank's InfoShop.
F. Environment
57.
The Project is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. However, it
is classified as Category B (triggering OP 4.01) because there might be occasions when the
RRNI teams decide to engage in small-scale civil works such as construction or rehabilitation of
latrines in schools, start fisheries, small-scale drinking water supply, construction of improved
stoves, etc. However, these are envisaged to be limited in numbers, of very small scale,
localized, and none of them are expected to be irreversible. The construction-related activities
will also be limited to existing school buildings, health posts, etc., thus additional land for the
project is not envisaged.
To prevent, minimize, mitigate and improve environmental
performance, the ESRSM guidelines were prepared for the project and include parameters for
environmental assessment as well as land acquisition.

18

Annex 1: Results Framework and Monitoring

Country: Nepal
Project Name: Community Action for Nutrition Project (Sunaula Hazar Din) (P125359)
Results Framework
Project Development Objectives
PDO Statement
The Development Objective for the Project is to improve attitudes and practices known to improve nutritional outcomes of women of reproductive age and children under the age of 2. Changes in
attitudes and practices would address the key risk factors for child malnutrition and create demand for nutrition related services and products. The supply of these services and products will be provided
through existing public sector and donor-funded programs, the private sector and, to a limited extent, financed through the Project.
Project Development Objective Indicators
Cumulative Target Values
Indicator Name

Core

Percentage of unmet
family planning needs
among women 15-25
years of age

Unit of Measure

Baseline

YRI

YR2

YR3

Data Source/
YR4

End Target

Responsibility for

Frequency

Methodology

Data Collection

Surveys

Consulting firms

Surveys

Consulting firms

Surveys

Consulting firms

Surveys

Consulting firms

Surveys

Consulting firms

Percentage

folic acid (IFA)
supplements for 180 days

Baseline, Midterm and end-ofProject

Percentage

Percentage of pregnant
women taking iron and

25.00

75.00

Baseline, Midterm and end-of-

PProject

Percentage of children 06 months age who are
exclusively breastfed

L_

Percentage

80.00

Baseline, Midterm and end-ofProject

Percentage of children 624 months age who
consume a minimum
acceptable diet

E

Percentage
Perenag

75.00

Baseline, Midterm and end-of-

Attitude of community
members towards the
importance of keeping
girls in school until at
least 20 years of age

Project

Percentage

75.00

19

Baseline, Midterm and end-of
Project

Attitude of community
members towards the
importnnce of reducing
indoor air pollution

Percentage
Percentag

75.00

Baseline, Midterm and end-of-

Attitude of pregnant
women towards the
importance of eating
three time a day
including at least one
animal-sourced food per
day

Percentage

80.00

Baseline, Midterm and end-ofProject

Surveys

Consulting firms

Surveys

Consulting firms

Data Source/

Responsibility for

Frequency

Methodology

Data Collection

Intermediate Results Indicators
Cumulative Target Values
Indicator Name

Core

Unit of Measure

Baseline

YRI

YR2

YR3

YR4

End Target

Number of wards
carrying out RRNIs

Number

0.00

2000.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD

Percentage of wards
carrying out RRNIs per
selected VDC

Percentage

0.00

80.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD

Number of RRNIs per
ward per year

Number

0.00

2.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFAFALD

Percentage

40.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD

Percentage

40.00

Trmstry,

Rutn

Routine

MOFALD

Percentage

80.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD

Days

21.00

Trimesterly,

Routine

MOFALD

Percentage

20.00

Trimesterly,
Annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD,VDC,DDC

Characteristics of RRNI
teams: % females
participating in all RRNIs

m

Characteristics of RRI

teams: %minority
participation (eg dalits,
janajatis, sunuwar) in all
RRIs
Percentage of successful
RRIs / VDC

w

Average time between
RRI proposal submissionmonitoring
and approval/rejection
Percentage of RRIs that
could not take off due to
public sector supply side
delays

20

Trimesterly,

Semi-annual meetings of
coaches conducted

Text

No

Twice a year

Bi-annually

Routine
monitoring

MOFALD

RRNI Process evaluation
conductedM

Text

No

Yes

Once, at Mid-term

Mid term review

MOFALD

21

Annex 2: Detailed Project Description
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
1.
The Project will roll out a social mobilization initiative in favor of improved
nutritional outcomes through a community-driven Rapid Results for Nutrition approach where
each ward will commit to a nutrition goal to be met within a 100-day period. The nutrition goals
will focus on five target groups which are considered critical for improving nutrition outcomes:
(i) girls and young women 15-25 years of age; (ii) pregnant women and women who want to
become pregnant; (iii) children 0-6 months and their mothers; (iv) children 6-24 months; and (v)
wards involved in community-wide interventions (such as hygiene, safe drinking water,
sanitation, etc). This approach will be piloted during the project preparation period in 2 wards
and will be rolled out under the Project in a sequenced manner across 15 districts in Nepal
selected in accordance with agreed criteria, including stunting rates, population size, poverty
rates and the absence of agencies that are presently working in the area of malnutrition using a
similar social mobilization approach.
The size of the Project is US$40 million to be
implemented over a 5-year period. The Project will be implemented in the 15 districts divided in
three clusters, each made of five contiguous districts. The "clustering" strategy is pursued for
three reasons. First, it facilitates the transmission of best practices/innovations and creates
"social proof' (i.e. stories of performance and results that motivate stakeholders). Second, it
facilities the creation of a reputation for RRNI work across communities. In other countries, this
has helped enroll communities into the RRNI process. Third, it lowers administrative and
operational burdens.
2.
Achievement of the nutrition related goals by the RRNI team would indicate a change in
the attitudes and practices related to proven risk factors for malnutrition. The menu of goals
does not include one specifically targeting knowledge but the achievement of the goals will
require RRNI teams and communities to learn - about teenage pregnancies, child spacing,
hygiene, appropriate diet during pregnancy, appropriate child feeding practices, etc. This
learning is built into the approach and facilitated by the coaches. Taken together, achievement of
the goals will indicate a change in attitudes and practices and directly contribute to Project's
objectives as stated in the PDO and PDO indicators.
3.
Component 1 (estimated US$34.86 million): Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives
at the ward level. This component will finance the reasonable costs of goods, services and
small works required to achieve a specific nutrition-related goal by the community. In every
ward in the Project ward-level teams will be mobilized and challenged to make a change in the
factors that have a negative impact on nutritional outcomes, the goals for which will be selected
from a menu. These teams will compose of 5 core members (the RRNI team) and supplemented
by 3-5 additional members as "agents of change", depending on the goal selected, to include
Female Community Health Volunteers (FCHVs), members of School Management Committees,
members of existing mothers groups, representatives of marginalized communities, nursing staff
from health facilities, youths, etc. The RRNI team and the "agents of change" together (the
RRNI Goal team) will elaborate the goal they will commit to achieve within 100 days and how
they will go about achieving that goal.

22

4.
The RRNI team will be mobilized by the coaches and social mobilizers recruited by the
Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development. The purpose of the Project will be
explained at the Ward Citizen Forum and the teams will be constituted according to interest and
guidelines, including the participation of women and minorities, and the other targeted
beneficiaries. The coaches will receive training in the RRNI approach and a training manual and
facilitation notes will be produced prior to the recruitment of RRNI teams.
5.
The RRNI teams will select their goal from a menu of priority goals for the achievement
of improved nutritional outcomes (see Annex 7). Once the teams have chosen and, if necessary,
customized the goal to fit the local situation, a simple work plan will be elaborated, stating the
goal to be achieved, the target value, the way the team wants to go about achieving their goal, the
way the team will ensure that the poor and marginalized will be included in the initiative, the
team composition and the inputs required to succeed.
6.
The work plan will be submitted to the NFSSC at the VDC level for approval for any
proposal that requires financial support of less than 1,000 US$ equivalent. Work plans that
require financial support over and above this level, and up to a maximum of 3,000 US$
equivalent, will be submitted to the NFSSC at the DDC level for approval.
7.
The NFSSCs at the VDC and DDC levels will review the work plans and, once approved,
coordinate the inputs required, if any. Required supplies will be secured through existing public
or private sector services if they are available (e.g. zinc tablets for the treatment for diarrhea,
together with ORS). If the work plan requires supplies which can not be secured through
existing channels, the RRNI teams will procure these on their own once. These supplies will be
financed under project funds (e.g. chickens for a community that wants to start chicken rearing in
order to diversify their diet). The RRNI Goal team will launch their initiative once the work plan
has been approved, the Grant Agreement with VDC signed and the supplies secured. This
official launch will be public and involve the Ward Citizen Forum in order to create awareness,
encourage community monitoring and facilitate the accountability of the teams for their
achievements.
8.
The coaches will keep in touch with the RRNI Goal teams on a regular basis and at midpoint, about 50 days after the launch, an assessment will be made whether the teams are on track
to reach their target, facilitated by their coach. If the teams are found not to be on track to meet
their goal, the work plan will be reviewed together with the coach and with the VDC and DDC,
if necessary, and amended. The RRNI Goal teams will declare their achievement to the Ward
Citizen Forum by the end of the 100 days, celebrate their success, if appropriate, and discuss the
sustainability of the achievement. At the same time the coach will encourage the Ward Citizen
Forum to take on a new challenge from the goals menu. Every ward will be encouraged to
launch at least two to three RRNIs per year and simultaneous initiatives are equally encouraged,
meaning that proposals need not necessarily be sequential.
9.
Component 2 (estimated US$5.14 million): Project Management, Capacity Building,
Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will provide support for the implementation of
Component 1 under three sub-components:

23

10.
Sub-component 1: Capacity enhancement (US$1.28 million). This sub-component will
finance training of the Project Management Team, the staff of regional departments and
NFSSCs, as well as of coaches and social mobilizers. At the national level, support will be
provided to a Project Management Team at the MOFALD. At the Regional level, support will
be provided to the Local Governance and Community Development Program (LGCDP) Cluster
units responsible for districts where the project will be implemented. NFSSCs at DDC and VDC
level will receive training and project management support to ensure that they are able to review
and process work plans and secure necessary supplies at the village level. Support to NFSSCs at
DDC and VDC levels will go beyond Project specific activities and include support in
coordinated planning and budgeting for nutrition relevant activities across sectors to be
incorporated in the district block grants. Coaches at the VDC level will receive appropriate
training and materials on the RRNI process in order to ensure high quality of work plans. The
training and the development of the materials will be contracted to a consultancy firm. The
Project will also support learning events for coaches on a semi-annual basis in their district
where they will be able to share their experiences and to learn about successful and innovative
projects.
11.
Sub-component 2: Project management (US$3.38 million): This sub-component will
provide the necessary inputs (consultant services, non-consultant services, goods and incremental
operating costs) for effective project management at national, DDC and VDC levels.
12.
Sub-component 3: Monitoring & Evaluation (US$0.48 million): This sub-component
will support monitoring and evaluation of the Project, including regular collection of data on the
implementation of the RRNIs, as well as data on nutritional outcomes. Third-party independent
verification of results of the RRNIs will carried out. The sub-component will also finance the
costs of mid-term evaluation focusing the changes in knowledge, attitudes and practices and endof-project impact evaluation focusing data collection on outcomes among the five main
populations targeted under the Project. Lastly, the component will finance the costs of a
Nutrition Learning Forum which will be organized annually by the National Planning
Commission where results of the project will be presented and discussed and where innovative
rapid results initiatives and project lessons will be highlighted. Beyond the monitoring of project
activities, support will also be provided to strengthen the overall monitoring and evaluation
framework for nutrition indicators and nutrition-related interventions in the districts.
13.
For the evaluation of the Project a cluster-randomized design to assess the overall
impacts in the areas where the study is being implemented. The Government has agreed to
oversample the number of village development committees that will likely fall under the Project.
Once all potential VDCs have been identified, the project team and the Government team will
randomly assign VDCs to treatment and control groups. This is referred to as a clusterrandomized design. There are several levels of impact that are of interest in observing - (i)
community wide program uptake, (ii) changes in attitudes and practices, and (iii) changes in
specific target indicators. For example, there will be an interest in observing changes in the
practice of exclusive breastfeeding or changes in smoking behavior, or the incidence of diarrhea
depending upon the goals chosen by the group which will be evaluated using a difference in
difference estimator. It will be important to ensure that the VDCs and wards in the sample are
quite similar and norms will be used to ensure that the sampling frame provides a reasonably

24

similar cluster of wards. Since the MOFALD has already identified the most disadvantaged
VDCs, it will be difficult to ensure that VDCs are not contiguous and hence there may be spillover effects.
14.
Given the interest in knowledge, behavior/practices and outcomes, the evaluation will
require the development of questionnaires to be targeted at different levels: VDCs, wards, and
households in which the individual level information will be captured. Standardized assessments
will be developed to ensure that household and individual measures of knowledge,
behavior/practices and outcomes can be captured. Such surveys would have to be fielded
periodically to capture the change in these indicators during the course of each 100 day RRNI
interventions.
15.
A single survey instrument will be developed that will applicable across a range of RRNI
interventions. So in the baseline, the survey team will have to establish baselines across the
entire set of indicators before knowing the specific nature of the intervention or goals that will be
chosen by each ward. However, once the particular goal or set of goals has been identified and
chosen, the follow-on surveys for that ward can be more narrowly focused. This will also ensure
that specific target populations are accurately identified and that the households that needed to
sampled will form part of the sample.

25

16.

The detailed project costs by components are as follows:
Project Costs
Nepal: SUNHADI Project (Community Action for Nutrition)
Exp.

Duration Number

Type

Unit

Unit cost (months) of Units

Total costs

Component 1 - Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives
Hiring of consultancy firm for facilitation/supervision

CS

lumpsum

per district, assuming that 25% of villages are covered)

CS

person

Forum)

IOC

lumpsum

donor financed

Hiring of coaches (1 per VDC, in 15 districts, 75 VDC
48

40

281

1,350,000.00

20,250

810,000.00

20,250

100

30,375,000.00

Selection of the Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives Team
Preparation & approval of Work Plans
Securing project supplies

Grant

DDC/VDC in 15 districts
Wards - 9 per village, average 75 villages
per district=675 wards per district,
totalling 10125 wards in 15 districts,
each carrying out 8 projects) - roughly
estimating that 20% of projects will cost

$2500 and 80% will cost $1250 and that
roughly 25% of villages will be selected

1 project/

in each district)

ward

Operating cost to support the implementation of RRNIs IOC

launch

50

20,250

1,012,500.00

meetings

25

20,250

506,250.00

end-evaluation

TOTAL

meetings

mid-evaluation

meetings

40

20,250

810,000.00

Component 1

F

I

34,863,750.00

Component 2 - Capacity enhancement, management and monitoring
Sub-component 1: Capacity Enhancement
Central levelI
Project Management Team

lumpsum

1,000

7

7,000.00

lumpsum

TR

1,000

6

6,000.00

Regional levelII

3 staff trained in 2 regions
TR

per region

15,000

Training Firm (train on nutrition issues, budget planningteam of 3 main trainers)
District level
NFSSC (14 people trained for 2 days to review
proposals by consultancy firm & 2 days by
consultancy firm on nutrition issues and to

develop managerial & leadership capacity)

180,000.00

12

CS

lumpsum
per

TR

district

3,000

15

45,000.00

3,000

281

843,000.00
98,437.50

Village level
NFSSC (8 people trained for 2 days to review
proposals by consultancy firm & 2 days by
Training firm on nutrition issues and to develop

managerial & leadership capacity)

lumpsum

TR

per village

that 25% of villages will participate)

TR

person

350

281

Social mobilizers(1 per village in 15 districts,
assuning that 25% of villages will participate)

TR

person

350

281

coaches (1 per village in 15 districts, assuming

Total: sub-component 1

98,437.50
1,277,875.00

26

Duration Number

Exp.

Type

Unit

Unit cost (months) of Units

Total costs

Sub-component 2: Project management
Central Level
Project Management Team
Project Director

person

1

Govt financed

Coordinators

person

1

Govt financed

FM Officer

person

1

Govt financed

Procurement Officer

CS

person

900

36

1

32,400.00

Social Mobilization Officer

CS

person

900

60

1

54,000.00

M&E Officer

CS

person

900

60

1

54,000.00

RRNI Technical Specialist

CS

person

900

60

1

54,000.00

Operating costs

IOC

year
lumpsum

2 Vehicles
Goods (PCs & other)

2,000

5

10,000.00

40,000

2

80,000.00

1,500

4

6,000.00

Goods

PCs

NCS

person

400

60

15

360,000.00

NCS

person

300

60

15

270,000.00

for 3 people in each of the 15 districts)

Goods

PCs

1,000

45

45,000.00

Motorcycle (1 per district)

Goods

unit

2,200

Operating costs & materials

IOC

per distric

District level

DDC accountant
NFSSC
Secretary
Goods (PCs & other office equipment

150

15
60

33,000.00

15

135,000.00

Village level
NFSSC
Goods (PCs & other for 2 people in each
of the 281 villages)
Goods
Operating costs & materials

IOC

PCs

1,000

year

100

562
60

562,000.00

281

1,686,000.00
3,381,400.00

Total: sub-component 2
Sub-Component 3 - Monitoring

donor financed

Baseline survey

CS

Mid-line survey (incl. process evaluation)

CS

lumpsum

1

124,475.00

End-line survey (attitudes, practices and nutrition indicat CS

lumpsum

1

175,000.00

Monitoring of RRNI mechanism

Routine monitoring (materials, etc)

IOC

lumpsum

CS

lumpsum

120,000.00

60

lumpsum

IOC

2,000

Third-party evaluations (sample of 10%
projects)

donor financed

Annual conference to present findings & innovations

(by NPC)
TOTAL: Sub-component 3

11,500

5

57,500.00
476,975.00
5,136,250.00

TOTAL: Component 2
PROJECT TOTAL:

27

Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Projectadministrationmechanisms
1.
The National Planning Commission (NPC) will provide policy guidance in accordance
with its mandate to coordinate Nepal's efforts in Food and Nutrition Security. The NPC has
taken the lead in the elaboration of Nepal's Multisectoral Nutrition Plan (MSNP) and has the
convening power to bring all involved partners together. The coordination function by NPC is
respected by all stakeholders in the area of Food and Nutrition Security and supported in this role
by a number of development partners, including the World Bank through the South Asia Food
and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI), the World Food Program, UNICEF and REACH.
The NPC has established a High Level Steering Committee on Food and Nutrition Security,
chaired by the Vice Chairman of the NPC. As the custodian of the MSNP it will organize annual
reviews of the progress in the implementation of the plan.
2.
Within the MSNP, the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MOFALD)
has been tasked with social mobilization in favor of improved food and nutrition security
outcomes. The MOFALD will be the main implementing agency of the project in view of this
role and the focus of the project. A Project Coordination Committee (PCC) will be formed,
chaired by the Joint Secretary (Project Director) and will include members of the Project
Management Team and representatives from the relevant line ministries. The PCC will meet
regularly to assist in addressing specific issues related to policy dialogue and intersectoral
coordination at the center, and inter agency coordination and performance at the project
implementation levels.
3.
A Project Management Team will be responsible for the day-to-day project
implementation and be headed by a Project Director (Joint Secretary) and include a Project
Coordinator (Under-Secretary), a Financial Management Officer who will be primarily
responsible for ensuring efficient flow of funds for the project and for financial reporting to the
Government and the Bank, a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, a Social Mobilization Officer, a
RRNI Technical Specialist, and a Procurement Officer who will provide support to the Project
Management Team in all matters related to procurement. The MOFALD has oversight of the
District Councils, which endorse all of the district level development programs of the
government and local bodies - District Development Committees (DDCs) and Village
Development Committees (VDCs), including implementation and monitoring. Certain functions
of health, agriculture and education are devolved which puts them under the purview of local
bodies. Coordination and consolidation of similar programs are done by the local bodies. Social
mobilization is one of the program components of the local bodies where the nutrition activities
under the project will be leveraged. Furthermore, local bodies are responsible to mobilize local
resources, including block grants. Among the grants that MOFALD has purview are the child
cash grants that are being implemented in Karnali zone and to the children of poor dalit families
throughout the country.

28

4.
The RRNIs will constitute separate grants to the 15 districts for the purpose of the project
to finance demand based sub-projects, relying on the established social mobilization mechanism
within MOFALD's LGCDP. The implementation mechanism will focus on nutrition issues,
through the involvement of NFSSCs at the district and village levels. The project will have its
own flow of funds mechanism under a separate budget line item. The NFSSCs will be charged
to review work plans submitted by wards and to ensure that the necessary inputs are secured.
This will require NFSSCs to closely coordinate their work with the district level representatives
of the relevant agencies, including Health and Population, Education and Agricultural
Development. Each NFSSC at the village level will also coordinate closely with the coaches
responsible for their villages to ensure that project implementation is as efficient as possible.
Similarly, each coach will work closely with the existing social mobilizers and with the Ward
Citizen Forums to ensure that the RRNI work plans meet the selection criteria and that the
implementation of RRNIs is carried out in accordance with the Work Plan. An Operations
Manual (OM) for the RRNI process will be developed and will provide all the necessary
guidance and information to staff involved in implementation at all levels, from ward to the
central level. The OM will also outline the responsibilities of staff at each level and the
monitoring and reporting requirements. As a supplement to the Operations Manual, a simplified
version of guidelines for the communities will also be prepared, which will be produced in the
Nepali language.
Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement
Financial
Management
Country Financial Management Environment
Lessons Learned from other projects implemented by MOFALD
Currently, the Bank has been working with the proposed implementing agency, the
5.
Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MOFALD), in four other projects - Social
Safety Nets Project, Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project, Emerging Towns
and Social Protection Project. There is a mixed experience from the implementation of these
projects from the financial management perspective. Overall, the financial management capacity
is weak in the Ministry and there has always been a challenge in deputing a competent finance
staff in projects. Frequent change of finance staff has often caused stress for meeting accounting
and reporting challenges. In the Rural Access Project, this risk has been mitigated by
supplementing the accounts staff by a consultant who supports both in maintaining the Financial
Management Information System (FMIS) of the project as well as providing back-up support in
the absence of finance staff. This has worked well in terms of getting the system running and
submitting financial reporting on time. After the first two years struggle for a good finance staff,
the MOFALD deputed a competent finance staff in the Social Safety Nets Project which ensured
smooth functioning of the project. The other two projects have just entered into the portfolio but
as in other cases, there is a start up delays in these projects. Getting right skilled finance staff for
these continues to be a challenge. In a project under MOFALD where more focus is at the
district, village and at community level, there is a need to ensure a qualified and skilled finance
staff who needs to be supplemented by a national consultant to ensure better monitoring of fund

29

flow and expenditures at the field level. Therefore, this project will finance the services of
accountants at the district level to mitigate this risk.
Risk Analysis
6.
From the financial management perspective, the overall risk is "Substantial". Given the
multi-sector nature of the project which requires specialized focus on the RRNI approach, it is
important to ensure the proposed governance arrangement for the implementation of the project
is put in place. The Project Coordination Committee chaired by the MOFALD Joint Secretary
(the Project Director) will need to play key oversight role to ensure smooth implementation of
the project. In addition, a dedicated project management team which should comprise of a
Project Coordinator, Finance Officer, Procurement Officer and technical specialists will need to
be put in place to be accountable for project implementation. It is also important that the
government will need to provide required funds to pre-finance the expenditures required for
project start-up which can later be reimbursed through a retroactive financing provision. The
project's Operations Manual will be prepared, defining the procedure and control measures for
the RRNIs. It will also provide all necessary guidance and information to staff involved in
implementation at all levels, from ward to central level. Overall, there will be strong efforts in
capacity building both in technical areas as well as overall project management which include
procurement and financial management. To address certain gaps that have been identified during
the assessment, risk mitigation action plans have been agreed, and the risks will be reduced as
the action plans get implemented.
Planning and Budgeting
At central level
7.
The Project will follow the government financial management procedures.
The
budgeting procedures for preparation, approval, implementation, and monitoring are elaborated
in the Financial Procedure Regulations (FPR). The annual work program and budget will be
based upon the work program to be prepared by MOFALD which will be endorsed by the Project
Coordination Committee. Annual work programs and budgets are submitted to the National
Planning Commission (NPC) and MOF for discussion. A separate budget line will need to be
created in the 'Appropriation Book' (Red Book or Budget) for FY2012/13.
8.
MOF will release authorizations for expenditure to MOFALD. The Secretary of
MOFALD will provide authorization for expenditure to the Joint Secretary (Project Director).
The Joint Secretary will further delegate his authority to the Project Coordinator of the Project
Management Team. The project funds will be managed by the Project Coordinator and the
designated Finance Officer.
At district level
9.
The Service Providers to be recruited by the PMT will play an important role in
providing coaches and for contracting out firms to conduct training for Nutrition and Food
Security Steering Committees (NFSSCs) guided by the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan. They will

30

be assigned to work at the grassroots level. Grants will be made available at the district level to
cover the operating costs of the NFSSC and the costs of RRNI proposals. RRNI proposals will
be approved by the NFSSC of the VDC if the proposal is within the range of about US$1000,
and for proposals between US$1000 to US$3000, it will be approved by NFSSC of the DDC.
Funds Flow and Financial Reporting Arrangements
The flow chart below depicts the authority flow arrangements.

Ban

olidated

MOF -

Worl d

fund

fu

Designated
Account
level

MOL? -

NFSSC DDC

E

.0 -**..
.7
EFCl
NSSC

VDC

FN

team
Flow of
funds

----

+

Financial
reporting

At central level

10.
MOF will release the budget as per the approved work program to MOFALD in three
tranches as per its fund release procedures. The budget approved by GON will be indicated in
the government's budget (Red Book). Prior to the approval of the annual work program and
budget, one-third release of the previous year expenditures or projected expenditures for the first
trimester, whichever is greater, will be made to the MOFALD through the respective DTCO.
Fund release for procurement of goods and consultants will be made directly from the
Designated Account which will be maintained by MOFALD and managed by the PMT. RRNI
grants to be provided will be pre-financed by the government under reimbursable heading, which

31

will later be reimbursed. Fund release for other IDA's share of other expenditures which include
capacity building will be pre-financed through GON's consolidated fund.
11.
Upon approval of the work program and budget, appropriate adjustments will be made
against the advance for the first trimester release. Subsequent second and third trimester releases
are based on performance reflected by the physical progress reports as required by Schedule 2 of
the FPR.
At district level
12.
Based on program submitted by the District Development Committees (DDCs), the MOF
will provide a separate funding stream for the respective DDCs. DDCs will receive funds for
project implementation (sanctioned by the concerned DTCOs) upon annual approval of the work
program. DDCs will finance operating costs of NFSSC and the grants that will finance RRNI
proposals based on a MOU (a format of which will be included in the OM) to be signed between
the Local Development Officer (LDO) of the DDC and the RRNI Team Coordinator. VDCs will
finance operating costs of NFSSCs at the village level from their budget.
Consolidation of Expenditures and Reimbursement
13.
For reimbursement of IDA's share of expenditures to GON's consolidated fund, a Special
Designated Account will be established in US Dollars at Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) to facilitate
quick payments of various activities under the project including reimbursement under terms and
conditions acceptable to IDA. MOFALD will designate the signatories to operate the Designated
Account. The signatories on the account will be the Project Coordinator and the Finance Officer.
The PMT will be responsible to consolidate all central level and district level expenditures and
take action on seeking reimbursement from the World Bank. Transaction-based (traditional)
disbursement procedures will be applied for withdrawal of funds.
Project Financial Accounting, Reporting and Internal Controls
14.
In order to ensure that project financial statements are consolidated, the Project
Management Team (PMT) will ensure that separate books of accounts are maintained for the
project and that accounts are prepared on a cash basis. The PMT will coordinate overall
activities and work under the guidance of the Project Coordination Committee.
15.
Accounting information will be regularly updated to generate timely financial reports.
As required by the government system, MOFALD will maintain required ledgers including the
Withdrawal Monitoring Register and Special Designated Accounts Ledger. GON's internal
control system will be applied to monitor the progress of the project in accordance with sound
accounting practices. The accounting systems contain the following features: (i) application of
consistent cash accounting principles for documenting, recording, and reporting its financial
transactions; (ii) a well-defined chart of accounts that allows meaningful summarization of
financial transactions for financial reporting purposes; (iii) maintenance of withdrawal
monitoring register, the record of SOEs and Designated Accounts register; (iv) the asset register;

32

(v) monthly closing and reconciliation of accounts and statements; and (vi) the production of
annual financial statements.
16.
The PMT will be accountable to prepare trimesterly Implementation Progress Report
(IPR) and project financial statements. The project IPR will be prepared from the outset,
showing the sources and uses of funds, output monitoring report, procurement management
report, and narrative progress report in format to be agreed upon. To match the public sector
planning and reporting cycle, the IPR will be produced on a trimester basis and submitted within
45 days from the end of the preceding trimester.
Financial Management Staffing
At central level
17.
The Project Management Team will be the overall coordination point to coordinate the
overall implementation and management of project activities. The PMT will have a qualified
full-time dedicated Project Director, an Accounts Officer and a Procurement Expert or
Consultant.
At district level
18.
The MOFALD will carry out the capacity assessment of the project districts from a
fiduciary perspective and assess whether the existing accounting staff at the district level could
also carry out the work load under the project or whether additional staff would be needed. In
the meantime, the costs of an accountant are included in the project costs to mitigate the risk of
possible substantial delays if the existing accountant staff are not able to take on the additional
work under the project.
Internal Audit and other assurance arrangements
19.
The District Treasury Controller Office (DTCO) and the District Development
Committees (DDCs) are responsible for internal audits of Project costs at MOFALD and at
project districts respectively. Internal audits are carried out on a trimester basis. MOFALD has
also approved guidelines for carrying out Public Audits, Public Hearings and Social Audits
which will all be applied under the project.
Implementation Progress Reports (IPRs)
20.
Total project costs are estimated around US$40.0 million to be financed from the IDA
Grant and the IDA Credit. Government counterpart contribution will be in the form of staff
costs, office space and other logistics.
21.
The Interim Financial Reports of the Project Implementation Progress Reports will report
total investments to be separated by specific activity so that total investments as envisaged can
be tracked and monitored. The PMT will separately produce from the outset the Project
Implementation Progress report, showing the sources and uses of funds, output monitoring

33

report, procurement management report and narrative progress report in format to be agreed
upon during negotiations. To match the public sector planning and reporting cycle, the IPR will
be produced on a trimester basis and submitted within 45 days from the end of the preceding
trimester.
Audit
22.
There are two ongoing projects implemented by the MOFALD - one for rural
infrastructure and the other for social safety nets, for which audit reports are required. The other
two projects have just begun and hence their audit reports are not yet due. There are no
outstanding audit reports from the ongoing projects under this Ministry. There is, however, an
audit issue related to Social Safety Nets Project. The audit reports of last two years (FY2009/10
and FY20 10/11) are qualified reports mainly due to non-compliance of submitting evidences of
reports by World Food Program (WFP) to the MOFALD. Expenditures incurred by WFP
constitute almost 80% of project expenditures, for which supplemental audit opinion is required
for both fiscal years. The resolution of this issue is required prior to Board presentation.
23.
The following is the audit 1 2 requirements under the Project: Annual consolidated project
financial statements, SOE Statement and Designated Accounts statements will be audited by
Office of Attorney General (OAG), which is considered acceptable by IDA for this purpose, and
submitted to IDA within six months after the end of the fiscal year - January 15.
24.
The following audit reports will be monitored in the Audit Report Compliance system
(ARCS):
Implementing

Audit

Auditors

Audit Due Date

Agency

MOFALD

Project Consolidated
Financial Statement

OAG

6 months after the
end of fiscal year
(January 15t)

Financial Management Action Plan
25.
Action plans to strengthen the financial management capacity of the Project were agreed
between the Recipient and IDA and are summarized below:
Financial Management Action Plan
Action
Responsibility
1. Submit Annual Work Program and Budget for FY2012/13
MOFALD
to include this Project in the "Red Book", and request MOF
MOF
to assign separate budget codes for the project.
2. Prepare Project Operations Manual
MOFALD
3. Form the core Project Management Team (PMT)
comprising of a Project Director, Finance Officer,
Procurement Officer, amongst other technical staff.
12

MOFALD

Completion Date
July 15, 2012

By the start of the
proj ect
By the start of the
proj ect

The standard Terms of reference applicable for other projects will be discussed and agreed with OAG.
34

4.
5.

Action
Develop and agree on the formats for Implementation
Progress Report and Project Financial Statement.
Carry out capacity assessments of project DDCs from a
financial management perspective

Responsibility
MOFALD &
IDA
MOFALD

Completion Date
By Negotiations
August 31, 2012

Disbursements

Allocation of credit/grant proceeds
26.
Disbursement under the Project will be made as indicated in Table C, which indicates the
percentage of financing for different categories of expenditures of the project. Total project is
US$40.0 million - US$22 million IDA Credit and US$18 million IDA Grant. Government
counterpart contribution is in the form of staff salaries, office space and related operating costs.
It is expected that IDA funds will be disbursed over a period of five years. The Closing Date of
the Project is June 30, 2017.
Table 1: Allocation of Credit/Grant Proceeds (US$ million)
Amount of the
Credit Allocated

Amount of the
Grant Allocated

Percentage of
Expenditures to be
Financed
(inclusive of Taxes)

(1) Sub-grants

15.5

14.9

(2) Goods, nonconsulting services,
and Incremental
Operating Costs
(3) Consulting
Services and

6.5

100% of Sub-grants
Amount disbursed
100%

Category

3.1

100%

Training

TOTAL AMOUNT

22

18

Designated Account
27.
To facilitate disbursements, a Designated Account in US Dollars will be established.
Payments for project expenditures for consultant services with firms or individuals and goods
will be made directly from the Designated Account by the PMT. RRNI grants, small value
contracts for non-consultant services, training, and incremental operating costs will first be prefinanced by the government, and once the accounts are consolidated and approved will be
transferred from the Designated Account to the government's consolidated fund. A Designated
Account in US Dollars will be established at the Nepal Rastra Bank, on terms and conditions
satisfactory to IDA. The ceiling for advances in Designated Account will be US$5.0 million for
both credit and grant. The Designated Account will be operated under the joint signature of the

35

Project Coordinator and the Finance Officer. The PMT will ensure that the bank/cash books are
reconciled with bank statements every month.
Retroactive Financing
28.
Retroactive financing will be provided for consulting services and operating costs
effective from Aprill, 2012 and not exceeding US$ 200,000.

Use of Statement of Expenditures (SOEs)
29.
Applicable disbursement methods include: Advance, Reimbursement and Direct
payment. The supporting documents for Reimbursement and Reporting uses of advances are: a)
Records evidencing eligible expenditures (e.g., copies of receipts, supplier invoices) for
payments against contracts that are subject to the World Bank's prior review; b) Statement of
Expenditures for all other expenditures / contracts; and c) A designated account reconciliation
and related bank statement for advance applications only. Detailed documentation requirements
are provided in the Disbursement Letter. During the supervision, the mission will closely review
SOE claims to ensure that funds are utilized for the intended purpose. Any ineligible expenditure
identified during such reviews will need to be refunded to IDA.
Procurement
General
30.
Procurement needs under the Project consist of very small value goods, works or services
under Component 1 (no procurement will exceed $3,000 in value), and of consultants
(individuals and firms) to provide TA to support project management, training to staff at
different implementation levels under Component 2, and for assignments for carrying out
surveys, evaluation and independent monitoring. Procurement under Component I shall be
carried out by the RRNI teams for those products/services that cannot be directly obtained from
public sector programs implemented by different Government agencies. Under Component 2,
consultant services and goods will be procured by the Project Management Team at MOFALD.
All procurement shall follow procedures prescribed in the national procurement law.
31.
All goods and services required for the Project and to be financed out of the proceeds of
the Credit/Grant shall be procured in accordance with the requirements set forth or referred to in
Section I of the "Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services under
IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers" published by the World
Bank in January 2011 ("Procurement Guidelines"), in the case of goods and non-consulting
services; and Sections I and IV of the "Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants
under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers" published by the
World Bank in January 2011 ("Consultant Guidelines") in the case of consultants' services.
32.

Particular Methods of Procurement of Goods, works and Non-consulting Services:

36

(i)
Except as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (ii) below, goods, works and non
consulting services shall be procured under contracts awarded on the basis of National
Competitive Bidding in accordance with the Public Procurement Act (and regulations made
thereunder), subject to the following additional procedures:
(a)

bid documents shall be made available, by mail or in person, to all who
are willing to pay the required fee;

(b)

foreign bidders shall not be precluded from bidding and no preference of
any kind shall be given to national bidders;

(c)

bids shall be opened in public in one place, immediately after the deadline
for submission of bids;

(d)

qualification criteria (in case pre-qualifications were not carried out) shall
be stated in the bidding documents, and if a registration process is
required, a foreign firm declared as the lowest evaluated bidder shall be
given a reasonable opportunity of registering, without let or hindrance;

(e)

evaluation of bids shall be made in strict adherence to the criteria
disclosed in the bidding documents, in a format and specified period
agreed with the Association and contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
evaluated bidders;

(f)

rebidding shall not be carried out without the prior concurrence of the
Association;

(g)

extension of bid validity shall not be allowed without the prior
concurrence of the Association (A) for the first request for extension if it
is longer than four (4) weeks and (B) for all subsequent requests for
extension irrespective of the period; and

(h)

there shall not be any restrictions on the means of delivery of the bids.

(ii)
The following arrangement specifies the methods of procurement, other than
National Competitive Bidding, which may be used for goods, works and non-consulting services
in accordance with the provisions of the Bank's Procurement and Consultant Guidelines. The
Procurement Plan shall specify the circumstances under which such methods may be used:
(A) Shopping (B) Direct Contracting for items which meet the requirements of Paragraph
3.7 of the Procurement Guidelines; (C) Established Private or Commercial Practices
which have been found acceptable to the World Bank and (D) Community Participation
procedures which have been found acceptable to the World Bank.
33.

Particular Methods of Procurement of Consultants' Services:

(i)
Except as otherwise provided in item (ii) below, consultants' services shall
be procured under contracts awarded on the basis of Quality- and Cost-based Selection.
(ii)
The following methods may be used for the procurement of consultants'
services for those assignments which are specified in the Procurement Plan: (A) Quality-based
Selection; (B) Selection under a Fixed Budget; (C) Least Cost Selection; (D) Selection based on

37

Consultants' Qualifications; (E) Single-source Selection; (F) Selection of Individual Consultants;
and (G) Sole Source Procedures for the Selection of Individual Consultants.
Review by the World Bank of Procurement Decisions
34.
The Procurement Plan shall set forth those contracts which shall be subject to the World
Bank's Prior Review. All other contracts shall be subject to Post Review by the World Bank.
Environmentaland Social (includingsafeguards)
35.
The Project triggers the OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous People (IPs) safeguard policy. OP/BP
4.10 is triggered to ensure that any adverse effects of the project are avoided or minimized, and
that the indigenous people receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits. While
the whole Project has been designed to benefit vulnerable groups, including the IPs, it is not exante known whether the wards where the project will be implemented coincide with those where
there is a significant presence of IP groups. To ensure that any adverse effects of the Project are
avoided or minimized, and these groups are able to access project benefits which are also
culturally appropriate social and economic beneficial, the Environmental and Social Risk
Screening and Management Guidelines (ESRSM) developed for the project includes measures
for these vulnerable groups which will help mitigate these risks and impacts, and enhance project
benefits to these groups.
36.
In addition to mitigating the risks and any potential negative impact of the Project, the
ESRSM guidelines also include activities, processes for public consultation and participation,
monitoring mechanisms, to enhance project benefits to communities, including vulnerable
groups, through the design and implementation of sub-project activities. The draft guidelines
were uploaded on MOFALD's website prior to project appraisal and the final guidelines were
uploaded prior to Negotiations. The guidelines will be disclosed in Nepali and English by the
MOFALD, and in English at the World Bank's InfoShop.
37.
The Project is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. However, it
is classified as Category B (triggering OP 4.01) because there might be occasions when the
RRNI teams decide to engage in small-scale civil works such as construction or rehabilitation of
latrines in schools, start fisheries, small-scale drinking water supply, construction of improved
stoves, etc. However, these are envisaged to be limited in numbers, of very small scale,
localized, and none of them are expected to be irreversible. The construction-related activities
will also be limited to existing school buildings, health posts, etc., thus additional land for the
project is not envisaged.
To prevent, minimize, mitigate and improve environmental
performance, the ESRSM guidelines were prepared for the project and include parameters for
environmental assessment as well as land acquisition.
Monitoring& Evaluation
38.
Monitoring of the project will entail activities that will empower communities and ensure
greater transparency, accountability and inclusion. The monitoring indicators will be obtained

38

from surveys and from routine data on physical and financial outputs. There will also be a third
party monitoring conducted by contracted civil society organizations and supervision missions.
39.
Before the implementation of the Project, a baseline survey will be done to assess the
attitudes and practices in the above domains in each project district. The survey will also
generate baseline data on the impact level indicators including the percentage of stunted children
0-24 months of age and the prevalence of anemia in pregnant women as a baseline. There will
be a similar survey conducted to evaluate the Project's progress in achieving its objectives and
anticipated impact 4 months before the Closing Date.
40.
To monitor the Project during implementation, a limited number of intermediate results
indicators are chosen to assess the progress of the project. The Project is designed to promote
the implementation of multiple Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives (RRNIs) within any given
ward in multiple villages in the targeted districts. The intermediate results indicators that will
measure the progress is the number of RRNIs carried out "successfully".
41.
At the community level, since people are empowered to implement their own action plans
to achieve goals, the team members will monitor their activities in a participatory method by
producing a chart of their completed actions and financial costs incurred for inputs. In order to
ensure transparency, the RR teams will hold meetings for the community people, one during the
mid phase and another during the end of each RRNI, to disclose the physical progress and
financial status of the RRNIs. Upon completion of RRNIs, the communities will submit RRNI
completion reports which will include an assessment of progress (goals achieved against the
target set by the team) and financial expenditures. The reports will be first discussed publicly at
community level, facilitated by the Village Development Committee (VDC), amended if
necessary, and subsequently submitted to the NFSSCs and the District Development Committees
(DDCs).
42.
The coaches of the RRNI teams will help build the capacity of the communities to
monitor their own activities during the pre-launch workshops and by holding regular
consultations with the team. At the RRNIs level at the communities, the monitoring parameters
will be kept as simple as possible.
43.
At the national level, since the MOFALD is the monitoring agency, it will oversee that
the coaches are proactive/entrepreneurial and receive appropriate training and supporting
materials to help them assist RRIs work at the wards. In order to ensure quality assurance of the
RRNI coaches, each DDC will hold monthly meetings with the coaches and make regular field
visits to monitor their work. The quality of coaches will be assessed by measuring the
percentage of "successful" RRNIs implemented under their guidance and by their effort to
motivate the communities to implement new waves of RRNIs.
44.
Since MOFALD is an implementing agency and will also be contracting out services to
provide and train coaches for the RRIs, validation of data by a third party source will be used to
measure progress of the project against the proposed intermediate results indicators and verify
the reports on the performance of the coaches. The frequency of the third party independent

39

verification of results will be yearly and will cover all the categories on a sample basis from each
district.
45.
After completion of RRNIs, communities are given a 7-days period
consolidated reports of completion (including financial and technical information).
be presented at end end-of-RRNI workshop with the participation of the coaches and
NFSSCs at the VDC level. The final report will be sent to the NFSSCs at the DDC.
will aggregate the data received from all RRNI teams on a trimester-ly basis and
report to the PMT. World Bank for review.

to submit
These will
the staff of
The DDC
submit the

46.
The Project will be evaluated at two periods during implementation- one at the mid-term
and another at the end of the project. The physical progress will be evaluated against the
targeted intermediate results set forth in the results matrix, against the targeted attitudes and
practices for each domain at district levels. Data for the intermediate results are collected by the
DDCs and then combined by the MOFALD at the central level. The two surveys (mid-term and
end-of Project) that are planned will be used to measure attitudes and practices for each domain
and the outcome level indicators.
47.
Beyond the monitoring of Project activities, support will also be provided to strengthen
the overall Monitoring and Evaluation framework for nutrition indicators and nutrition-related
interventions in the districts. Through the support to NFSSCs nutrition related information from
the health sector, the education sector, the Ministry of Physical Planning and Works and
Planning, the Ministry of Agricultural Development and the Ministry of Federal Affairs and
Local Development will be linked with the District Poverty Monitoring and Analysis System
(DPMAS) at district level and with the Poverty Monitoring and Analysis System (PMAS) at
central level.
Arrangements for results monitoring
48.
The MOFALD will be responsible for the implementation of the monitoring and
evaluation process, specifying the roles, responsibilities and institutional arrangements.
49.
The MOFALD will ensure good governance and accountability by regular and timely
disclosure of activities related to the project including program budgets, contracts and
procurement, audit issues and actions taken to address them. The disclosure will be made on the
MOFALD websites and by notices at the district levels.
50.
Besides the reports on physical progress and financial management, the MOFALD will
also report on the obstacles encountered, opportunities foreseen and suggestions to improve the
implementation of RRIs during the annual and mid-term reviews. This will be done by holding a
workshop at the central level by involving key stakeholders of the RRIs. The end of Project
evaluation will be conducted during the last six months of the project.

40

Annex 4: Operational Risk Assessment Framework (ORAF)
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

Stage: Appraisal

1.1 Stakeholder Risk

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) Change of policy direction in addressing under-nutrition.

(i) The project design is aligned to the results and outcomes envisaged in the Multi sectoral Nutrition Plan.

(ii) The focus on the first 1,000 Days may be questioned as being
too narrow

Resp:

(iii) Possible risk of exclusion of marginalized groups.

(ii) As during the preparation of the Multi-sectoral Nutrition Plan, the policy dialogue will continue to have a strong focus on the evidence-base. Training will
be provided to stakeholders at all levels of project implementation.

Low

Bank

Stage:

Recurrent:

Preparation

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Risk Management:

Resp:

Bank

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Risk Management:
(iii) Work plans by the Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives (RRNI) teams at the ward level will specify how marginalized groups would be included in the
RRN initiatives, as per criteria to be outlined in the Operations Manual. Also, the RRNI teams will have representation from key most affected groups in the
community.

Resp:

2.

Oprtn

Enir.mn

Bank

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Risks

3.1 Capacity

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) Coaches may not have the requisite capacity to adequately
guide the RRNI teams and wards in goal selection as well as how
the goals are being met.

(i) The coaches would be selected in accordance with agreed criteria. Also, an extensive training program will be put in place to enhance the capacity of the
coaches on the RRNI mechanism and the goals templates.
Resp: Bank
Stage: Preparation
Recurrent:
Due Date:
Frequency:
Status:
In Progress

(ii) The NFSSCs at village and district level may not have the

Low

nagement:

41

capacity to meaningfully review and assess the RRNI Proposals
(ii) Training will be provided for the staff of NFSSCs at village and district level. Also, the approval of the Rapid Result Work Plans will be guided by a set of
and to ensure an effective supply of required inputs for the RRNIs. criteria, including the realism of the targets proposed. As to the supply of inputs, the mandate of NFSSCs is to ensure a coordinated response working with all
relevant ministries. Staff of NFSSCs would get training in management and hold regular meetings with all involved parties and regularly report to the
(iii) MOFALD capacity to effectively manage the Project may be MOFALD on the status of implementation.
insufficient given the Project's innovative nature. Coordination
Progress
Frequency:
Due Date:
Recurrent:
Stage: Preparation
with DDC and VDC levels may be an issue as well as tracking of Resp: Bank
project implementation and performance.
Risk Management:
(iv) Financing arrangements and financing management, including (iii) The MOFALD will be assisted by a Project Management Team. Coordination will be assured through the representation
of involved line ministries in a
adequate flow of funds, provision of a budget line item, timely
PrjcCodiaonom
te.
audits and reporting may be hampered due to the novelty of this
Project Coordination Committee.
operation. Financial management capacity at the DDC level is
Resp: Bank
Stage: Preparation
Recurrent:
Due Date:
Frequency:
Status:
In Progress
weak with a high tum-over of staff.

O

O

Risk Management:
(iv) The Financial Management Officer in MOFALD who will be charged to ensure effective management of financial management has experience with Bankfinanced projects and is aware of the required documentation and reporting requirements. Additional training will be provided on the specific flow of funds
mechanism to ensure that he is adequately versed in this area. When needed, he can be supplemented by a consultant as the implementation moves forward.
At DDC level the Project will finance the services of an accountant.
Resp:

Bank

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Status:

In Progress

Substantial

3.2 Governance

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) Possible confusion & lack of clarity between DDCs and VDCs
on roles and responsibilities vis a vis Project implementation and
monitoring.

(i) Project Operations Manual will detail the roles and responsibilities of all actors in the Project at all levels.
Resp: Bank
Stage: Preparation
Recurrent:
Due Date:
Frequency:

(ii) NFSSCs might delay the supply of inputs to communities for
the RRNIs.

Risk Management:

O

(ii) The OM will detail the service standards with regards to turn-around time for NFSSCs to approve proposals and provide necessary inputs. In addition, a
monitoring and reporting system will be established to measure the responsiveness of NFSSCs. Lastly, a complaint mechanism will be established.
Resp:

Fraud and Corruption
Description:

Rating

Bank

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

O

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Substantial

Risk Management:

(i) RRNI teams may inflate the required inputs and costs as well as i) The RRNI mechanism would include a public launch at the start of the 100-day project and a public review of achievements & costs at mid-terms and at the
inflate results. Also, resources may potentially be used to
end. Also, the MOFALD has already institutionalized the practice of social audits before making the last payments and this practice will be applied to the
unintended purposes.
Project as well. In addition, there would be an independent verification of the results by a third party monitoring group carried out on a sample basis. Lastly,
the RRNI approach requires simplified but rigorous and frequent financial reporting, enabling early detection of irregularities.
Resp:

Client

Stage:

Implementa

Recurrent:

4.1 Design

Rating

Due Date:

O

tion

High

42

Frequency:

Status:

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) RRNI teams may not select the most salient goals or set realistic (i) Support will be provided to the RRNI teams and the wards by trained coaches on the goal templates. There would be easy-to-follow materials/pamphlets
prepared for each goal, describing the kinds of interventions which may be suitable to meet that goal. This information will be part of the Operations Manual.
targets or might choose inappropriate ways of achieving these
Also, this risk is expected to be minimized with time as communities leam the RRNI mechanism.
goals.
Resp: Client
Stage: Implementa
Recurrent:
Due Date:
Frequency:
Status:
Not Yet
(ii) There may be difficulties in selecting and hiring of coaches for
tion
Due
all the Project selected VDCs.
Risk Management:
(iii) Communities may request inputs or the level of support which (ii) It is estimated that roughly 300 coaches would be required to implement the Project. Given that the implementation would be rolled out gradually, the
the project cannot provide.
selection of coaches does not have to be completed immediately upon project start. This will lessen the burden of having to select and hire all 300 coaches at
once. In addition, the hiring of coaches will be simplified by contracting three Service Providers, one per cluster of five districts, who will be responsible for
(iv) Potential complexity of the RRNI mechanism given its novelty supplying the coaches.
in Nepal.
Resp: Client
Stage: Implementa
Recurrent:
Due Date:
Frequency:
Status:
Not Yet
tion
Due

O

O

Risk Management:
(iii) The Operations Manual will include a "negative" list of inputs which will not be eligible under the Project. Also, the criteria for goals and guidance on
possible RRNIs will help communities to make better decisions, including setting a financial cap on the cost of Work Plans.
Resp:

Client

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

O

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Risk Management:
(iv) The RRNI mechanism will be introduced prior to the start of the Project and adjusted for the Nepal context. The Project plans to roll out the mechanism
gradually to ensure that there is sufficient buy-in and understanding ofthe process. Existing mechanisms, such as the MOFALD social mobilization program,
would also reduce the risk of complexity as communities are already acquainted with similar types of outreach programs in Nepal.
Resp:

Bank

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Substantial

4.2 Social and Environmental

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) The Project is mainly a social mobilization program that is
expected to have only minor, if any, environmental impacts.

Potential adverse environmental impact, if any, from some subproject activity is expected to be site-specific and limited. To prevent, minimize, mitigate and
improve environmental performance, "Environmental and Social Risk Screening and Management Guidelines" have been prepared, disclosed and will be
included in the OM for the Project.

(ii) Interventions may not be targeted to include the most
vulnerable segments of the population.

Resp:

Client

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

C

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Risk Management:
(ii) RRNI Work Plans will only be approved when in compliance with a set of criteria that include an acceptable approach towards assuring the inclusion of
vulnerable and under-served segments of the population.
Resp:

Client

Stage:

Implementa
tion

Recurrent:

Substantial

4.3 Program and Donor

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

43

O

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

Not Yet
Due

Duplication of effort and contradictory approaches may arise when The government and the main donors are already involved in a major effort to harmonize their work programs along the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan led by
the Project is not prepared in close coordination with other
the National Planning Commission. Due to the unique design of this operation there is little dependency of this Project on other interventions planned by other
partners.
development partners as special efforts have been made to avoid overlap (i.e. district selection).
Resp:

Client

Stage:

Preparation

Recurrent:

O

Due Date:

Frequency:

Status:

In Progress

Substantial

4.4 Delivery Monitoring and Sustainability

Rating

Description:

Risk Management:

(i) Potential risk that innovations and lessons learned during the
RRNI process will not be appropriately disseminated and
integrated back to improve implementation.

(il) Mid-line and end-line RRNI evaluations will be carried out and responsible VDCs will be charged with ensuring that information flows across to other
villages and districts as well as to the national level. In addition, innovative projects would be publicly recognized by the National Planning Commission at
Annual Learning Events. This would provide an added incentive for the VDCs and coaches to report on innovations.

(ii) Sustainability might be an issue since the RRNI approach may
not encourage the continuation of activities. However, since the
Project's objective is to create demand, it is expected that
knowledge will be transferred horizontally as well as from one
generation to another.

Resp:

Substantial

Description:

Nodsloal

Stage:

Implementa
tion

Recurrent:

Client

Stage:

Implementa
tion

Recurrent:

fo

Maaemn

Due Date:

0

Frequency:

Due Date:

Implementation Risk Rating:
Description:

Inomto

O

Status:

Not Yet
Due

Risk Management:
(iii) Coaches at the village level would help build the capacity of the communities to analyze their situation and to perform social mobilization to generate
information sharing and demand continued support from the public and private sector on key nutrition interventions. Also, the institutionalization of the RRNI
approach will be promoted by training the NFSSCs and existing social mobilizers. The training of NFSSCs will include capacity enhancement in planning and
budgeting as to incorporate the RRNIs in the regular budget cycle for the existing district block grants.
Resp:

Preparation Risk Rating:

Client

Attntin(Otioal

Comments:

44

Frequency:

Substantial

Status:

Not Yet
Due

Annex 5: Implementation Support Plan
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
1.
The implementation support plan for the Project has been developed based on the specific
nature of the project activities, lessons learned from past operations in the country and sector,
and the project's risk profile in accordance with the Operational Risk Assessment Framework
(ORAF). The plan will be reviewed regularly and revised as and when required.
2.
The plan includes thorough and frequent review of implementation performance and
progress. The Bank team will monitor progress on the following, inter alia: (i) key performance
indicators as identified in the Results Framework; (ii) progress against the agreed activities and
targets set out in the project procurement plan and the implementation plan; (iii) performance of
RR teams with respect to their identified goals; (iv) the responsiveness of district and village
NFSSCs in providing key supplies, as per approved work plans; (v) key legal conditions and
covenants; and (vi) whether sufficient funds are available in the project for the selected
communities to carry out RRNIs, as planned. Information from various sources will be used to
assess and monitor progress of the Project throughout its implementation. The Bank will also
review the findings and results of third party assessments, surveys and social audits which will
be undertaken during the course of Project implementation.
In addition to formal
implementation support missions and field visits, which will be carried out semi-annually, the
Bank team will participate in the annual conference organized by the National Planning
Commission where findings and innovations from the RRNIs will be presented.
3.
The Bank fiduciary specialists based in the country office will provide timely and
effective support to the client. In addition to carrying out an annual ex-post review of
procurement that falls below the prior review thresholds, the procurement specialist will lead
thematic and focused missions depending on the procurement needs and as agreed with
Government. The FM team will also provide capacity building efforts that include organizing
periodic financial management clinics and coaching to the Project staff. In addition to ex-post
review of the financial management system, the team will also review all financial management
reports included in the trimester implementation progress reports and annual audit reports and
take necessary follow-up actions as per Bank procedures. These team members will also help
identify capacity building needs to strengthen fiduciary management. Safeguard specialists will
also be involved in supervision throughout the Project to ensure the monitoring of
implementation of agreed plans. Support to implementation will be as follows:
Time

Focus

Skills Needed

1st twelve

Project launch

Nutrition/Health Specialists, Operations Specialist, Procurement
Specialist, Financial Management Specialist, Social Development
Specialist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist
Nutrition/Health Specialists, Operations Specialist, Economist,
Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist
Procurement and Financial Management Specialists

months
Technical Reviews
Procurement/FM training and
supervision
12-48
months

Bi-annual technical and fiduciary
reviews

Nutrition/Health Specialists, Operations Specialist, Economist,
Procurement and Financial Management Specialists, Monitoring
and Evaluation Specialist, Social Specialist

45

Annex 6: Project Objectives within the Causal Pathway for Malnutrition
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

Exogenous factors

Cultural/Social context

Weather, geography, prices
technology

Women's status,
Institutions, political
Structure, civil unrest

Public/private health
System
Access to health care,
nutrients, quality of

Government
welfare

Other public
services

nrograms

Agriculture.

Households and individuals
Income, assets and savings, household composition,
human canital. time

Propsed
p
E j

Prepregnancy
nutritiona

Dietary

intake of
mnthers and

Age at pregnancy,
number and
nacinp of

Nutritional status
Low birthweight,
stunting, underweight,

Hygiene
Smoking
and
and
indoor airnittin

Child care
practices

Use of
preventive and
curative health

Health Status

Adapted from IEG 2010, what can we learn from nutrition impact evaluations, Black and others, 2008, Ruel and Hoddinot, 2008, Smith and Haddad, 2002, and
UNICEF, 1990

46

Annex 7: Goal Templates
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
Girls and young women aged 15 to 25 (Priorities: Anemia, Delayed Pregnancy, School
Attendance)
These RRNIs would be implemented primarily by youth aged 15 to 25. Senior leaders would
mostly likely be members of an SMC, Citizen Ward Forum, FSNC. Alternatively the team could
be formed from an existing youth-focused group. The primary focus of these RRIs would be
youths. However, at the group's discretion, for some goals there could be overlap into other subpopulations (e.g. the goal focused on FP could focus on all women who want to delay a first or
next pregnancy and not just youths).
Goal Template
Illustrative Sub-projects
At least
families with adolescent girls make a public pledge to Training for health
delay marriage and first pregnancy of daughter(s) until at least 20 facilities to provide youthyears of age, in the next _ days
friendly services, peer
program, positive deviance
analysis, establishment of
youth center, community
based services for the youth
At least _ girls of school-going age who do not want to become
Provision of school
pregnant are regularly attending school, in the next _days
supplies, mid-day meals,
take-home rations,
performance based grants
Peer programs, health
At least _ girls receive de-worming and weekly iron-folic acid
worker visits to schools
weeks.
supplementation, for the next
At least _ girls/women who do not want to become pregnant are
using a family planning method, in the next
days

Training for health
facilities to provide youthfriendly services,
establishment of youth
center and community
based services for the youth

Pregnant women or women who want to become pregnant in the next 6 months. (Priorities:
Protein, Iron, Smoking, Breastfeeding)
These RRNIs would mostly like be implemented by mother's/women's groups, or an existing
health-focused group. Senior leaders would be from Ward Citizen Forum or NFSSC
Goal Template
Illustrative Sub-projects
At least _ women who may want to become pregnant/are
Peer programs with
pregnant take the appropriate amount of supplements of iron and
mother groups, groupfolic acid in the next _ days.
wise monitoring of IFA
intake
At least _ women who may want to become pregnant/are
Peer programs, FCHV and
pregnant complete a treatment of de-worming in the next _days
mother-group advocacy
At least _ (families with) women who may want to become
Peer programs, advocacy

47

pregnant/are pregnant make a public declaration not to smoke
inside the house, in the next
days
At least _ women who may want to become pregnant make a
public declaration to stop smoking before pregnancy, in the next
days
At least
families with women who are pregnant make a public
pledge to lessen their workload.
At least
families with underweight girls or women who are
pregnant or may want to become pregnant gain the appropriate
amount of weight, in the next
days
At least _ women who are pregnant eat three times a day,
including, at least one animal-sourced food per day for the next
days.

programs
Peer programs

Peer and advocacy
programs, positive
deviance analysis
Peer programs ,
goat/chicken rearing,
fisheries project

Children 0-6 months and breast feeding mothers (Priorities: Breastfeeding, Hygiene,
Immunization, BMI)
These RRNIs would mostly like be implemented by mother's/women's groups, or an existing
health-focused group. Senior Leadership could come from Ward Citizen Forum or NFSSC.
Goal Template
Illustrative Sub-projects
At least _ children under the age of 1 year receive
Outreach vaccination
immunizations to be in compliance with the recommended schedule, program for the VDC,
in the next _ days
"Fully Immunized VDC"
campaign
At least
families with make public pledge for exclusive breast Mother group peer
feeding of children until the age of 6 months, in the next
days
programs with FCHVs
At least
HH with children 0-24 mo pass hand washing
Advocacy and peer
checklist, in the next _ days
programs, soap
distribution, "Community
Led Total Behavior
Change in Hygiene and
Sanitation" campaign
At least
lactating women eat three times a day, including, at
Advocacy, peer programs
least one animal-sourced food per day for the next
days.
with mother groups,
animal husbandry
projects
At least
HH with children 0-24 that have an improved cooking
Improved stove
stove, in the next
days
construction, advocacy.
At least
women with children 0-24 months make a public
pledge to keep the inside of their house smoke-free , in the next
days
At least
children with signs of chest infection, diarrhea and/or a
Mother group/FCHV
fever receive proper treatment within 1 day of on-set of symptoms,
meetings and education
in the next _days
on early signs and
symptoms and the
benefits of early

48

treatment
Children 6-24 Months (Priorities: Comp feeding. Iron/MNPs, Protein, Diarrhea/ORS)
These RRNIs would mostly like be implemented by Mother's/Women's groups, or an existing
health-focused group. Senior Leadership could come from Ward Citizen Forum.
Goal Template
Illustrative Sub-projects
At least
underweight children gain an appropriate amount of
CMAM, goat/chicken
weight, in the next _days
rearing, fisheries project,
growth monitoring
At least
children age 6-24 months eat at least one egg/piece of
Community advocacy,
meat/fish or a glass of dairy each day for the next _days
goat/chicken rearing,
fisheries projects
At least
HH with children 6-24 months pass a IYCF checklist, in Mother group peer
the next
days
programs, community
advocacy.
At least
HHs with children 6-24 months eat a meal with MNPs
Community branding of
once a day, each day for the next _ days.
MNPs, peer programs
among mother groups
At least
children with diarrhea immediately receive proper
Mother group peer
treatment (ORS, Zinc and increased feeding), in the next _days
programs, branding and
marketing of Zinc
At least
HH with children 0-24 mo pass hand washing check"Community Led Total
list, in the next _days
Behavior Change in
Hygiene and Sanitation"
campaign
Community wide (Priorities: Protein, safe water, Hygiene)
Teams could come from a variety of different community-based groups, selected at large by the
Ward committee. Senior Leaders could come from Ward Citizen Forum or NFSSC.
Goal Template
% of HH make public commitment against open defecation, in
the next
days
days
Community declared ODF within _

Ensure
sources of water in the community pass "clean water
check list" at the point of consumption, in the next
days

At least
HHs with children or women of child baring age have
access to a source of eggs, meat/fish or dairy, in the next _days
School has appropriate number of latrines in _

days.

49

Illustrative Sub-projects
Latrine construction,
Community Led Total
Behavior Change in
Hygiene and Sanitation"
campaign
Small construction
(spring boxes, pumps,
etc), Community Led
Total Behavior Change in
Hygiene and Sanitation"
campaign
Funds for goat/chicken
rearing, fisheries
Advocacy, latrine
construction

Annex 8: Districts selected for major nutrition projects
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

GlobalAricT-re and food SE-ty prramo

LSgend:

S

Hazar Din IDA)

Sahara Prod (HINl)
Fh*d tho F-t-re Pronpct (UISAl)

50

(GAFSP

Annex 9: Relevant on-going/planned projects in Project districts
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

Agency a nd

d9

3

il

WB
PAF

X

X

X

X

X

X

SSNP

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

RWSSP

X

X

AGEI

X

X

Bio gas

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

WFP
GIP

RO

X

ACF
CMAM

X

UNFPA
ASRH

X

FP

X

X

X

X

UNICEF
CMAM
MNP/IYCF

X
X

X

X

GM
CFLG

X
X

X

X

HKI
HFP

X

PAF: Povert Alleviation Fund; SSNP: Social Safety Net Project; AGEI: Adolescnet Girls Employement Initiative; GIP: Girls Incentive Program; RO: Refugee Operation;
CMAM: Community Management of Malnutrition; ASRH: Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health; FP: Family Planning; MNP: MicroNutrient Powder; IYCF: Infant
and Young Child Feeding; CG: Child Grant; GM: Growth Monitoring; CFLG: Child Friendly Local Governance; HFP: Homestead Food Production

51

Annex 10: Economic and Financial Analysis
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

A. The project's macroeconomic context
1.
Public expenditure is growing in recent years while concerns about its quality
remain. Despite slow growth in revenue, expenditure remains high. At the same time, reports
from the Public Accounts Committee shows an increase of 42 percent in outstanding audit
irregularities in FY11 compared to previous year. Poor public finance management manifested
in weak internal control system, non-compliance with prevailing law and breakdown of internal
controls, and weak accountability are all worrisome signs. The country is going through a
transition and the rate of turnover of government officials is high. In the past few years alone
various coalition of political parties formed government only to be replaced by another coalition
after several months. As such political stability remains elusive and such an environment can
easily feed into increased public spending and weak accountability.
2.
The project is likely to improve the quality of public spending in a number of ways.
First, as the Project aims to generate demand for social services, the efficiency of public
expenditure on these services can improve. Second, through demand creation, the project
enhances the accountability of service providers at the community level. Accountability at the
community level is essential in the current political environment where political instability has
created an atmosphere which presents challenges to efforts to promote accountability at a higher
level to improve quality of public spending.
3.
The project is likely to improve the quality of public spending in a number of ways.
First, as the Project aims to generate demand for social services, the efficiency of public
expenditure on these services improves. Second, through demand creation, the project enhances
the accountability of service providers at the community level. Accountability at the community
level is essential in the current political environment where political instability has created an
atmosphere not suitable for promoting accountability at a higher level resulting in poor quality of
public spending.
4.
The fiscal impact of the project is likely to be limited. The Project may reduce
wastage by generating demand for excess capacity, but in the absence of excess capacity, it may
also result in increased public spending on social services. Demand for such services is expected
to increase due to the Project. If there were excess capacity, then this capacity will be utilized,
hence improving efficiency of public spending. However, when the supply is not enough to
accommodate the increase in demand, then there will be pressures to increase public spending on
these services. As such, given the budget available excess capacity in the supply of these
services and the rate of budget absorption, the fiscal impact of the Project is likely to be limited.
5.
The project's impact on distribution is clear in that it benefits the poor, children
and women. The target beneficiaries in specific populations are relevant to achieving the PDO
including girls and young women between 15 and 25 years of age, pregnant women and women
who want to become pregnant in the next 6 months, children below 24 months of age and their

52

caretakers. Geographically also, the Project will benefit the poorest VDCs in 15 districts
selected on the basis of poverty levels, nutritional status, and the absence of similar interventions
by other partners.

B. Sectoral Spending levels and trends
6.
There has been an increase in social services spending over the last ten years.
Spending rose to 11.7 percent of GDP in 2010 from 5.4 in 2001. As such, it represents doubling
of spending on social services within a decade. This includes an increase in spending in rural
infrastructure, safety net programs, and grants to local governments which mostly benefits
education, health water and sanitation programs. Spending on drinking water and sanitation has
been increasing but still remains less than 1 percent of GDP (Figure 1). In line with the policy of
expanding access to drinking water, an average 67 percent of the sector's spending goes to rural
and community-managed drinking-water activities. Spending in the education sector has been
increasing, and at 4.1 percent of GDP remains the largest of all social sectors. More than onehalf of the education sector's spending goes toward primary education, with more teacher
deployment and scholarships to underserved regions. Spending in health also has increased
substantially in the past ten years, reaching 1.4 percent of GDP in 2010 from 0.83 percent in
2001. More than three quarters of public spending in health goes into services that are
preventive in nature and assists in increasing immunization coverage, contraceptive use, and
improving nutrition ultimately reducing maternal, child and infant mortality rates.
7.
Expenditures in the social sectors are becoming increasingly pro-poor Expenditure in
education is the most pro-poor at 14.07 percent of total expenditure in 2010 followed by local
development at 6.38 percent and health at 4.95 percent. Although expenditures in local
development and health are catching up with education, with an increase of pro-poor expenditure
in local development by 72 percent and health more than 48 percent between 2003 and 2010.
During the same period, the increase in pro-poor expenditure in education was only 3.7 percent.

4.5
4

o3.5
2K-Education

S2.5
--

Health

S1.5

--

Water and Sanitation

1

--

Local Development

2

0.

_

0.5

0
C0

rHC1
0

Cn
0

ZJ
0

0

W
0

h0

00
0

al1
0

0
-

CN

q

CN

CN

Nq

Nq

CN

Nq

Nq

CN

Year
Figure 1. Spending in Social Service as a Percent of GDP

Source: PER, 20 10, World Bank.

53

8.
Given the budget utilization rate, the Project is unlikely to push public expenditure
in these sectors higher than its current level but has the potential to improve efficiency.
The increase in demand due through the project can be accommodated through existing level of
13
spending. As noted in the recent public expenditure review , the key issue in these sectors in
effective implementation. Improving implementation is cited as the main potential source of
efficiency gains. At the same time, budget execution in these sectors remains well below the
allocated amount and there is significant potential to increase supply with the current budget
allocation.

C. Why invest in nutrition and why involve public sector?
9.
Why invest? There a growing body of evidence that demonstrates the rational for
investing in nutrition, especially in developing countries such as Nepal.
10.
Nutritional interventions contribute significantly to the reduction of child and
maternal mortality and physical and cognitive damages. Millions of mothers and children
die globally and millions more are permanently disabled by mental and physical defects due to
underlying causes of malnutrition and poor dietary intake early in life. The costs of irreversible
physical and cognitive damage that children face due to under nourishment by 24 months of age
are very large. The impact of such damage is has a strong intergenerational component.
11.
At the same time, there are known and available effective interventions to reduce
underweight, stunting, micronutrient deficiencies, and child deaths in Nepal. Recent
analytical work commissioned by the Bank 1 4 has reviewed the evidence for essential nutrition
intervention and provided the evidence base on what works for Nepal. Among those
interventions reviewed, breastfeeding counseling, appropriate complementary feeding, and
vitamin A and zinc supplementation were identified as having the greatest potential to reduce
child deaths and the future disease burden related to malnutrition.
12.
Investment in these interventions will contribute to reducing maternal and child
mortality and reducing poverty by enhancing productivity, cognitive development, and school
performance. There is a large body of evidence showing the link between income/eaming and
nutritional status. At the macroeconomic level, malnutrition could result a significant loss of
national income. In countries with high levels of anemia, for instance, it is estimated to cause
about a 2% reduction in GDP15 . At the household level, malnutrition causes a significant
reduction in earning: a study in Brazil found that a percentage decrease in adult height could
16
result in up to 4% reduction in earnings . More importantly, improved nutrition will reduce
maternal and child mortality.
13World Bank. 2010. Public expenditure Review, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management unit,
South Asia.
14World Bank. 2012. Accelerating progress in reducing Maternal and Child Undernutrition in Nepal: A review of global
evidence of essential nutrition interventions for the Nepal Health Sector Plan II and Multisectoral Plan for Nutrition.

1 Strauss, John and Thomas, Duncan. 1998. "Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development" JournalofEconomic
Literature36(2):766-817. AND Horton, Susan andRoss, J. 2003. "the Economics of Iron Deficiency" Food Policy
28(1):51-75.
16 Strauss, John and Thomas, Duncan. 1998. "Health, Nutrition, and Economic Development" JournalofEconomic
Literature36(2):766-817.

54

13.
Nutritional interventions are found to be among the most cost-effective
interventions to enhance welfare globally. In the Copenhagen Consensus 2008, a panel of
renowned economists, ranked five nutritional interventions among ten of thirty proposals
presented to answer the question of the best way to advance global welfare. It ranked micro
nutrient supplements for children including vitamin A and zinc supplementation first, micro
nutrient fortification including iron and salt iodization third, de-worming and other nutrition
programs at school sixth and community based nutrition promotion as ninth. The ranking takes
into account the benefit cost ratio, feasibility and sustainability of the interventions.
14.
But why involve the public sector in Nepal? Even when investment in nutrition is
worth making, there needs to be well argued case for public involvement in those investments.
From an economics perspective, a case has to be made either from a market failure or from an
equity/poverty reduction perspective to justify public involvement and hence the project. In
Nepal there is sound case for public involvement as described below:
Information 'asymmetry' and externality: people do not always have full information on
feeding practice and food that is best for their children and themselves. Because growth faltering
may be the norm, and micronutrient deficiencies are not typically visible enough to be easily
recognized, they are often even unaware of the need to invest in improving the nutritional status
of their children. The role of information is even more critical because of the limited window of
opportunity where the highest impact on nutrition could be made. The benefit of improved
nutrition accrues not only to the individual making the investment but to the society at large as
improved nutrition reduces the impact of disease and improves productivity. An absence of
internalization of all the benefits of one's investments results in underinvestment in nutrition
relative to that which is socially desirable.
60
50

0 ** Poorest
***g** Poorer
Middle

30

20

***X** Richer

.. *

**.)K Richest

10

-

TotalI

0
1996

2001

2006

2011

Figure 2. Prevalence of Moderate Stunting by Wealth Index, Children 6-24 months of age - 1996-2011
Source: Preliminary result from "thematic report on food security and nutrition. The report uses NLSS III.

Equity and poverty: there are two equity considerations that justify public investment in
nutrition in Nepal. First, the burden on malnutrition falls on the poor disproportionately.

55

Table_1 shows the prevalence of severe and moderate stunting for children aged 60 months and
under in 2011. Malnutrition is concentrated among the rural residents, households with illiterate
women and the poorest. Moreover, the trend shows that while malnutrition has declined
nationally, this reduction is concentrated among the richest households. If anything, malnutrition
has increase among poor households (Figure 2).
Hence, the fact that the poor are
disproportionately affected by malnutrition is a good reason for public intervention.
Furthermore, it is well established in the literature which looks at the nutrition- poverty nexus
that the poor are trapped in a low income-low nutrition equilibrium and public intervention is
essential to breaking this vicious cycle. Second, in an economy where access to credit is limited,
the opportunity to transfer assets across time is limited especially for the poor. This is true for
Nepal (see Besley, Jain and Tsangarides, 2001)." Although the returns to investments in
nutrition are high and are common knowledge, such high return investments are beyond the
reach of the poor due to credit constraints that the poor face.

17 Besley, Timoth. Jain, Sanjay, and Tsangarides, Charalambos. 2001. "Household
participation in formal and informal
institutions in rural credit markets in developing countries: evidence from Nepal" Background paper prepared for World
Development Report 2001/2002.

56

Table 1. Nutritional status and household characteristics, children 60 months and below.
Stunting
Household
characteristics

Underweight

Wasting

%
Moderate

%
Severe

Number

%
Moderate

%
Severe

Number

%
Moderate

%
Severe

Number

Urban

30.5***

9.1***

613

21.9***

6.9***

615

11.7**

4.3

609

Rural

48.7

20.0

1852

36.8

9.9

1869

14.6

2.6

1848

None

54.1***

24.5***

616

43.1***

13.0***

617

16.2**

3.1

610

Literate

53.7

23.1

603

41.8

14.2

608

15.6

3.8

603

Completed 5-7
years

45.8

16.9

474

30.0

5.5

475

13.4

1.7

470

Completed 8-10
years

38.8

11.9

368

29.2

5.1

366

11.7

2.7

363

Completed > 11
years
Expenditure
quintile

23.0

6.2

414

16.1

3.5

418

11.1

2.1

411

Poorest

57.3***

27.4***

477

45.4***

15.2***

476

15.5

4.2

474

2

55.0

23.9

481

40.0

11.9

487

16.7

2.3

476

3

49.2

17.1

481

37.3

8.3

481

13.6

2.2

481

4

38.4

13.2

501

28.8

8.2

504

13.5

3.4

497

Location

Maternal
education

Richest
30.2
10.7
532
21.6
3.9
536
11.6
2.1
529
*** <0.001; ** <0.05
Source: Preliminary result from "thematic report on food security and nutrition. The report uses NLSS III data.

D. Valuation of the project
15.
The success of the project is measured by the extent to which it creates demand for
nutrition related services. The impact on nutritional status, however, depends on both the
generated demand for nutritional related services and the responsiveness of the supply to the
increase in demand. It is envisaged that the supply response will be supported mainly by
ongoing projects and programs in the various sectors including health, education, safety nets, and
rural development. This complicates the economic and financial analysis of the project as it
requires a counterfactual world that represents the situation in the absence of the project.
Fortunately, the impact evaluation planned under the project enables such exercise to be carried
out. The impact evaluation will provide rigorous results to undertake a cost effectiveness
analysis. The planned impact evaluation provides a rare opportunity to undertake an economic
evaluation on the size of impacts that is less affected by estimation problems, unobserved
heterogeneity and at times endogeneity that most non-experimental studies suffer from.

57

16.
Few studies have been done on the cost and benefit of nutritional interventions. The
benefits and costs vary by country and are context dependent in a sense that they depend on the
state of the economy, relative prices, the health status and other environments. Yet, global
estimates presented in Table 2 provide some broad insight to benefits and costs of investments in
nutrition.
Table 2. Costs and Benefits of selected nutritional interventions, range of global estimates.
Interventions
Benefits
Costs
Benefits/cost
Breastfeeding promotion in hospitals
$5952-8929
$133-1064
5.6-67.1
Integrated child care programs
$376-653
$40
9.4-16.2
Iodine (per child bearing age)
$75-130
$0.25-5
15-520
Iron (pregnant women)
$82-140
$10-13.4
6.1-14
Note: Both benefits and costs are in USD ; discount rate = 3-5%; One can relax the assumption of valuing life from
earnings to a fixed amount of say $100,000 so that all life saved whether in poor or rich countries is valued equally.
This certainly increases the benefit cost ratio of the interventions dramatically. It changes the benefit cost ration of
the breastfeeding promotion to the range of 108-939.8, of Iodine to the range of 622.6-13388; of Iron to the range of
636.9-952.3.
Source: Behrman, Alderman and Hoddinot. 2004. " Nutrition and Hunger" In Global Crises, Global Solutions, ed,
Bjorn Lombrog. Cambridge ,UK: Cambridge University Press.

58

Annex 11: RRNI cycle, approval framework and reporting framework
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
1. Coach visits VDC Secretary and VDC level Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee, explains the purpose
2. Coach and representative of VDC level Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee visit Ward Citizen Forum (9),

I1

@;iplaiop

YMIdc
etttLV

II 1

gIU /'1jU5t

ut

up uticAd.
Wh71 agT1717, 110I

ikaiti
&M

goat t

7icuutf Vli
ll1"'l

4. RRNI team members are selected in accordance with the guidelines and as suitable for the selected goal
5. RRNI teams and coach elaborate a target and a work plan
6. Work plans submitted to Ward Citizen Forum for endorsement and then to VDC or to DDC, copied to VDC for approval
(see approval framework)
7. After DDC approves funding, Nutrition and Food Security Steering Committee secure supplies from public sector
agencies
8. Funds, if required, are released from DDC to VDC for non-public sector inputs
9. Once required input secured and available, RRNI teams and coach launched their Initiative at Ward Citizen Forum
and RRNI teams go to work
10. Weekly/fortnightly team meetings with the coach
11. About 50 days after the RRNI launch, a mid-term assessment is done by the RRI teams and their coach and adjustments
made when and where required to achieve the goal
12. After 100 days RRNI teams and their coach meet the Ward Citizen, report on their achievement and the use of funds,
followed by a discussion on how to sustain the achievement and on the choice of the next goal
RRNI cycle starts afresh

59

Annex 11b: RRNI Approval Framework
Work Plans up to US$ 1,000
equivalent

RRI tea

Work Plans between US$ 1,000 and
3,000 equivalent

WCFtea

WCF

endorsesendorses
VDC- NFSSC approves and
recommends for fu ding

DC - NFSSC copied for
information
DDC- NFSSC appr ves and
s for funding
reco

DDC - approves
funding

60

Annex 11 c: Results Reporting Framework
Public
RRN
team

AWCF
VDC

MOFALD Regional
Cluster Unit

D C

MOFA
LD

N
PC

RRNI: Rapid Results for Nutrition InitiativE Witizer-Forum;
VDC: Village
Development Committee; DDC: District Development Committee; NFSSC: Nutrition and Food
Security Steering Committee, MOFALD: Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development;
NPC: National Planning Commission

Annex 12: Brief on GON's Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan
Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Plan:
reduction of Maternal and Child under- Nutrition in Nepal
For accelerating the

8

Forty-one per cent of children in Nepal suffer from chronic malnutrition (DHS, 2011). The
immediate causes of chronic malnutrition in Nepal include poor feeding and acre practices,
insufficient nutrient intake, high rate of infection and teenage pregnancy. Less than half(44.5%)
of babies are initiated with breastfeeding though 70% are exclusively breastfed at 6 months, only
65% are introduced to complementary foods after 6 months; most importantly complementary
feeding is infrequent, and inadequate in terms of quality, quantity and safety. Only one-fourth of
the children (DHS, 2011) are fed with the recommended IYCF practices (4+ food group and
minimum mean frequency). A quarter of mothers give birth before the age of eighteen. Then,
they are often involved in heavy workload including farming immediately after delivery, plus a
quarter of them smoke that account for 30% low birth weight in 2006, while less than a quarter
were provided with any quality animal protein food or foods made with oil or fat the day before
(DHS, 2006). Maternal and infant infections are very common; intestinal parasites constitute
18 Extracted from: MSNP Policy Brief, The National Planning
Commission, 2012

61

one of the major public health problems; prevalence of fevers (19%) are as common as diarrheal
diseases (14%) while ARI is affecting 5% of children , all causing young children's deaths and

malnourishment (DHS, 2011).
With regards to the underlying causes of chronic malnutrition, ensuring food security for an
estimated 3.5 million (Initiative on Soaring Food Prices- FAO) of the population in food deficit
areas throughout the year is an uphill task. There is still a wide gap in sanitation services with
half the population still defecating in the open. About half of the population lives in single
roomed dwellings with a mud floor and an open fire for cooking and heating. Regarding the
basic causes, there is increasing inequity. Some of the discriminatory and exclusionary practices
based on gender, caste, class, religion, ethnicity or regions persist but development actors and
agencies have significantly improved their orientation on social inclusion and gender in recent
years.
The longer-term vision of the multi-sectoral nutrition plan, over the next ten years, is to embark
the county towards significantly reducing chronic malnutrition to ensure that it is no longer
becomes an impeding factor to enhance human capital and for overall socio-economic
development. The goal over t he next five years, is to improve maternal and child nutrition which
will result in the reduction of Maternal Infant and Young Child (MIYC) under-nutrition , in
terms of maternal BMI and child stunting, by one third. The main purpose is to strengthen
capacity of the NPC and the key Ministries to promote and steer the multi-sectoral nutrition
program for improved maternal and child nutrition at all key levels of society.
MSNP will contribute towards attaining its long-term vision and mid-term goal by achieving
three major outcomes:
Outcome 1: Policies, Plans and muti-sectoral coordination improved at national and local levels.
Outcome 2: Practices that promote optimal use of nutrition "specific" and nutrition" sensitive"
services improved, leading to enhanced maternal and child nutritional status.
Outcome 3: Strengthened capacity of central and local governments on nutrition to provide
basic services in an inclusive and equitable manner.
The plan focuses on the narrow window of growth falter, with an urgent set of essential
interventions, and will complement other relevant sectoral policies and strategies, such as the
health sector's National Nutrition Policy and Strategy (2004) and agriculture sectors upcoming
Food and Nutrition Security Plan (FNSP) as part of Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).
The MNSP has identified eight outputs (results):
Output 1: Policies and plans updated/ reviewed to incorporate a core set of nutrition specific
indicators at national and sub- national levels. NPC and sector ministries will be responsible to
attain this result.
Output 2: Multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms functional at national and sub-national
levels. NPC and local bodies will be responsible to attain this result.

62

Output 3: Maternal and child nutritional care service utilization improved, especially among the
unreached and poor segment of the society. The health sector will be responsible to attain this
result.
Output 4: Adolescent girl's parental education, life skills and nutrition status enhanced. The
education sector will be responsible to attain this result.
Output 5: Diarrheal diseases and ARI episodes reduced among young mothers, adolescent girl's
infants and young children. The physical planning and works sector will be responsible to attain
this result.
Output 6: Availability and consumption of appropriate foods (in terms of quality, quantity,
frequency and safety) enhanced and women's workload reduced. The agriculture, environment
and local development sectors will be responsible to attain this result.
Output 7: Capacity of national and sub-nationals levels enhanced to provide appropriate support
to improve maternal and child nutrition. NPC, health, education physical planning and works,
agriculture, and local development sectors will be responsible to attain this result.
Output 8: Multi-sectoral nutrition information updated and linked both at national and subnational levels. NPC, health, education physical planning and works, agriculture, and local
development sectors will be responsible to attain this result.

63

Annex 13: Statement of Loans and Credits
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project
Active Projects

Difference Between
Expected and Actual
Original Amount inUS$ Millions

Disbursements

Project ID Fiscal Year Project Name

IBRD

IDA

SF

GEF

P120265
P104015
P099296
P112893
P105860
P110762
P043311
P118179
P095977
P083923
P071285
P113441
P090967
P117417
P113002
P087140

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

25.00
50.00
64.30
38.00
192.50
50.00
164.80
43.00
117.60
77.00
52.30
130.00
60.00
129.15
64.47
20.00
1278.12

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

2011
2011
2008
2011
2008
2008
2003
2012
2008
2005
2004
2010
2007
2010
2009
2009

Emerging Towns Project
Enhanced Vocational Educ & Trng
Irrig & Water Res Mgmt Project
Kabeli Transmission Project
PAF II
Peace Support Project
Power De\elopment Project
Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Project
Road Sector De\elopment Project
Rural Access Improve. & Decentralization
Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project
School Sector Reform Program
Second Higher Education Project
Second HNP and HIV/AIDS Project
Social Safety Nets Project
Agriculture Commercialization & Trade
Total:

Cancel.

Undisb.

0.03
0.76

3.74

4.53

Orig. Frm Revd

24.84
42.95
25.96
35.48
72.63
24.31
81.57
36.77
56.68
40.04
4.58
79.81
30.98
106.07
15.47
15.68
693.82

-0.06
0.41
6.46
1.17
-18.85
25.94
-18.96
-4.20
-20.94
-4.33
-17.51
10.07
8.63
15.57
-28.10
4.16
-40.54

8.58
-5.44
25.27
53.16
1.31
11.34
6.27
3.60
12.40
116.48

NEPAL IFC Portfolio
Committed and Disbursed Outstanding Investment Portfolio
As of 4/3012012
(In USD Millions)

Committed

FY Aproval

Company

2009
2010
1998
2011
2010
2010
2009

Buddha air nepal
Butwal power co
Jomsom resort
Nepalbo2
Nirdhan mib
Rmdc nepal
Smartchoice
Total Portfolio:

*
**

Disbursed Outstanding

Equity

7.88
6.32
4
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0.28
0.25
0.64
0.35

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

18.2

1.52

0

Denotes Guarantee and Risk Management Products.
Quasi Equity includes both loan and equity types.

64

**Quasi
Equity *GTIRM

Partici
pant

Partici
pant

Loan

Equity

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7.88
3.49
4
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0.19
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0

0

15.37

0.19

0

0

0

**Quasi
Equiy *GTIRM

Loan

Annex 14: Nepal At A Glance
NEPAL: Sunaula Hazar Din - Community Action for Nutrition Project

Key Development Indicators

South
Asia

Nepal

Low
income

Age distribution, 2010

(2010)

Male

Population, mid-year (millions)
Surface area (thousand sq. km)
Population growth (%)
Urban population (% of total population)

30.0
147
1.8
18

1,633
5,131
1.4
30

796
15,551
2.1
28

GNI (Atlas method, US$ billions)
GNI per capita (Atlas method, US$)
GNI per capita (PPP, international $)

14.5
490
1,210

1,920
1,176
3,124

421
528
1,307

Female

75-79
45-49
30-34

15-19
0-4

SA_

10

GDP growth (%)
GDP per capita growth (%)

4.6
2.7

8.1
6.6

Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, %)
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.00 a day (PPP, %)
Life expectancy at birth (years)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Child malnutrition (% of children under 5)

25
57
68
41
39

36
71
65
52
33

59
70
23

Adult literacy, male (% of ages 15 and older)
Adult literacy, female (% of ages 15 and older)
Gross primary enrollment, male (% of age group)
Gross primary enrollment, female (% of age group)

72
47

73
50
113
107

69
54
108
101

Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)

89
31

90
38

65
37

5

5.9
3.7

10

0

percent of total population

(most recent estimate, 2004-2010)
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Ur
150
100

..
..

50

0

1990

1995

2000

ENepal
Net Aid Flows
(US$ millions)
Net ODA and official aid
Top 3 donors (in 2010):
United Kingdom
Japan
United States

1980

1990

2000

ESouth Asia

2010

821

160

423

16
24
8

26
55
17

23
100
16

105
81
52

8.2
11

11.6
22

7.0
16

5.2
27

Consumer prices (annual % change)
GDP implicit deflator (annual % change)

9.6

9.9

3.3

Exchange rate (annual average, local per US$)
Terms of trade index (2000 = 100)

12.0

Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)

9.6

Aid (% of GNI)
Aid per capita (US$)

386

2010

Long-Term Economic Trends

10

5
0
-5

7.6

10.7

4.5

28.5

69.1

13.4

05

95

-4-GDP

GDP per capita

74.5

..

1980-90 1990-2000
2000-10
(average annual growth %)
Population, mid-year (millions)
GDP (US$ millions)

15.0
1,946

19.1
3,628

24.4
5,494

30.0
15,722

2.4
4.6

2.5
4.9

2.1
3.8

(% of GDP)
51.6
40.8
16.2
22.1
6.1
9.4
32.1
37.0

36.1
15.4
6.6
48.5

4.0
8.7
9.3
3.9

2.5
7.1
8.9
6.2

3.2
2.5
0.7
4.4

Agriculture
Industry
Manufacturing
Services

61.8
11.9
4.3
26.3

Household final consumption expenditure
General gov't final consumption expenditure
Gross capital formation

82.2
6.7
18.3

84.3
8.7
18.1

75.9
8.9
24.3

82.0
10.6
34.7

..
..

..
..

..

..

11.5
18.7
13.6

10.5
21.7
10.1

23.3
32.4
30.0

9.8
37.1
23.3

..

..

..

..

Exports of goods and services
Imports of goods and services
Gross savings

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

65

4.3
5.7
10.2
-1.6
6.1

Balance of Payments and Trade

2000

2010
Governance indicators, 2000 and 2010

(US$ millions)
Total merchandise exports (fob)
Total merchandise imports (cif)
Net trade in goods and services

971
1,713

820
5,082

Voice and accountability

-658

7,481

Political stability and

173
3.2

11,273
71.7

absence of violence

Current account balance
as a % of GDP

Regulatory quality
Ruleof law

Workers' remittances and
compensation of employees (receipts)

111
953

Reserves, including gold

3,468

Control of corruption
25

0

2,287

CenralGovrnmnt
inace02010
Central Government Finance

50

75

100

ountry's percentile rank (0- 100)

rhigher imty beterrati1g
vaue

(% of GDP)
Current revenue (including grants)

12.2

0.0

Tax revenue
Current expenditure

8.7
9.4

0.0
0.0

Overall surplus/deficit

-3.3

Seurce: Woddwide Governance Indicaters (wwwgovindicators or)

0.0

Technology and Infrastructure

Highest marginal tax rate (%)
Individual
Corporate

..

..

..

Paved roads (% of total)
Fixed line and mobile phone
subscribers (per 100 people)
High technology exports
(% of manufactured exports)

..

2000

2010
..

1
0.0

53.9
34
0.6

External Debt and Resource Flows
Environment
(US$ millions)
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Total debt service
Debt relief (HIPC, MDRI)

2,867
102
52.2
5.4

23.5
3.6

0
0

Total debt (% of GDP)
Total debt service (% of exports)

3,702
187
-

Agricultural land (% of land area)
Forest area (% of land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)

88
0

30
25.4
17.0

0.13

0.12

2.7

3.1

Energy use per capita (kg of oil equivalent)
Private, 3

6,734
4.7

C02 emissions per capita (mt)

Composition of total external debt, 2010

7,754
5.1

GDP per unit of energy use
(2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)

Foreign direct investment (net inflows)
Portfolio equity (net inflows)

Freshwater resources per capita (cu. meters)
Freshwater withdrawal (% of internal resources)

29
27.2
17.0

332

338

IBRD,0

Bilateral, 374

World Bank Group portfolio

2000

2010

IDA,1,426

(US$ millions)

Other multilateral, 1,724

IBRD
Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Principal repayments
Interest payments

IMF,
114

US$ millions

Private Sector Development

Stock market capitalization (% of GDP)
Bank capital to asset ratio (%)

0
0
0
0

IDA

2000

Time required to start a business (days)
Cost to start a business (% of GNI per capita)
Time required to register property (days)
Ranked as a major constraint to business
(% of managers surveyed who agreed)
n.a.
n.a.

0
0
0
0

Total debt outstanding and disbursed
Disbursements
Total debt service

2011
-

2000

29
37.4
5

IFC (fiscal year)
Total disbursed and outstanding portfolio
of which IFC own account
Disbursements for IFC own account
Portfolio sales, prepayments and
repayments for IFC own account

2010

..

14.4

MIGA
Gross exposure
New guarantees

..

30.8

1,132
49
24

1,426
11
54

75
50
12

32
28
0

0

7

33
0

29
0

..

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified.
.. indicates data are not available. - indicates observation is not applicable.

4/5/12

Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

66

Millenium Development Goals with selected targets to achieve between 1990 and 2015
(estimate closest to date shown, +/- 2 years)

Nepal

Goal 1: halve the rates for extreme poverty and malnutrition
Poverty headcount ratio at $1.25 a day (PPP, % of population)
Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty line (% of population)
Share of income or consumption to the poorest qunitile (%)7.9
Prevalence of malnutrition (% of children under 5)

1990

1995
68.0
41.8
44.1

..

Goal 2: ensure that children are able to complete primary schooling
Primary school enrollment (net, %)
Primary completion rate (% of relevant age group)
Secondary school enrollment (gross, %)
Youth literacy rate (% of people ages 15-24)

65
51
32
50

Goal 3: eliminate gender disparity in education and empower women
Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education (%)
Women employed in the nonagricultural sector (% of nonagricultural employment)
Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)

2000

43.0

71
66
35
70

40
.

57

68

2010
24.8
8.3
38.8

44
82

3

33

110
79
56

6

77
14
6

84
64
77

50
41
86

Goal 4: reduce under-5 mortality by two-thirds
Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births)
Measles immunization (proportion of one-year olds immunized, %)

141
97
57

Goal 5: reduce maternal mortality by three-fourths
Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births)
Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total)
Contraceptive prevalence (% of women ages 15-49)

870
7
24

700
9
29

550
12
37

380
19
48

Goal 6: halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS and other major diseases
Prevalence of HIV (% of population ages 15-49)
Incidence of tuberculosis (per 100,000 people)
Tuberculosis case detection rate (%, all forms)

0.2
163
33

0.4
163
56

0.5
163
74

0.4
163
72

76
10
33.7
7.7
0.0
2.3

80
15
14.0
0.1
2.6

83
20
27.2
17.0
0.1
2.7

89
31
25.4
17.0
0.1
3.1

0.3
0.0
0.0

0.4
0.0
0.0

1.1
0.0
0.2

2.8
30.7
7.9

Goal 7: halve the proportion of people without sustainable access to basic needs
Access to an improved water source (% of population)
Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)
Forest area (% of total land area)
Terrestrial protected areas (% of land area)
C02 emissions (metric tons per capita)
GDP per unit of energy use (constant 2005 PPP $ per kg of oil equivalent)
Goal 8: develop a global partnership for development
Telephone mainlines (per 100 people)
Mobile phone subscribers (per 100 people)
Internet users (per 100 people)
Computer users (per 100 people)

Education indicators (%)

Measles immunization (% of 1-year
olds)

..

ICT indicators (per 100 people)

100

100

40

75

75

30

50

20

25

10

50I
25-m

0
2000

2005

2010

0

0
1990

--Primary
,

1995

2000

2010

2005

2000

2010

net ennollment ratio

Ratio of gids to boys in primary & secondary
education

*Fixed

UNepal

ESouth Asia

Note: Figures in italics are for years other than those specified. .. indicates data are not available.
Development Economics, Development Data Group (DECDG).

67

+ mobile subscribers

:lntemet users

4/5/12



