Nepal: Human Development Social Protection Pilot (HDSPP) Project, (TF099288)
Implementation Support Consultations
17 to 25 November 2011
I.

Introduction

1.From November 17 to 25, 2011, a joint World Bank and United Nations Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF) team visited Nepal to undertake implementation support consultations for
a review of the Human Development Social Protection pilot project (HDSPP)'. The objectives of the
consultations were to (i) review the status of project implementation and discuss any implementation
challenges towards achieving project objectives; (ii) review the composition and capacity of the project
team and the project's readiness with regard to procurement and financial management capacity; (iii)
discuss potential strategies for evaluation of the HDSPP project; and (iv) discuss targeting options for
selecting beneficiaries. The team held discussions with the Joint Secretary of the Local Governance and
Community Development Program (LGCDP); the project management team headed by Under
Secretary/HDSPP Project Manager from the Population and Vital Event Registration Section (PVERS)
of MoLD; the Joint Secretary of Ministry of Education (MOE); the National Program Manager of
LGCDP and the Social Protection donor group (SPTT).
2.
This Aide-Mdmoire summarizes progress of project implementation, issues discussed during
the Review, and agreements reached on the key next steps. The review findings and recommendations
were discussed in a pre wrap-up meeting with the Joint Secretary and Project Management Team and
later discussed and agreed in a wrap-up meeting with the Secretary of MoLD on Nov. 25, 2011.
3.
The review team is grateful to the Government counterparts, in particular, MoLD and MOE,
development partners and other stakeholders for their cooperation during the consultation.
I.

Summary of review Findings

4.
The grant agreement between Government of Nepal (GON) and the World Bank was signed
on August 19, 2011 and the Memorandum of Understanding between GON and UNCDF was signed in
November 2011. However, preparatory work had taken place prior to signing the agreements.
Disbursement under the recipient-executed (RE) grant has not yet begun.
5.
Project implementation is progressing relatively well, with actions taking place in parallel to
address the short implementation timeframe. Progress towards the project development objective (PDO)
is on track considering the grant signing date. Detailed implementation procedures are prepared; and
poverty-based beneficiary targeting designs, MIS design, evaluation and payment mechanisms are all
either completed or under finalization. Terms of Reference and Request for Proposal documents for the
household (HH) registration have been sent for the Bank's review and no objection. The HH registration
process is expected to be fielded by February 2012 covering an estimated 80,000 households in all VDCs
in the two selected districts (Kanchanpur and Dadeldhura).
6.
GON and UNCDF have extended the project closing date to July 2013, while the closing date
of the Bank-administered grant (Rapid Social Response Multi Donor Trust Fund - RSR grant) is
September 30, 2012. Both GON and the co-financier (UNCDF) have expressed concern about the RSR
Grant closing date, with the same concerns shared by the Bank team. MoLD requested the Bank team to
' The composition of the review/consultations team is illustrated in annex 1.

2
explore the possibility of extending the grant closing date to align it with the current GON/UNCDF
closing date. MoLD informed the review team that an official request for extension will be sent to the
Bank in the coming weeks.
During the consultation, targeting methods for selection of households were agreed. A mix of
7.
Proxy Means Testing (PMT) and Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) will be used and evaluated for
performance. It was also agreed that the HH registration process will serve three purposes i.e. HDSPP
targeting, local planning and vital registration. The scope and functional requirements of the MIS
system were finalized and agreed, and the scope, key design features and research questions of the pilot
evaluation were also agreed. Terms of Reference and Requests for Proposals for service delivery of these
program process steps are under development, and the review team urges MoLD to pursue timely
implementation over the following weeks and months.
The review of the main cash transfer programs implemented by MoLD (funded under the
8.
Bank-executed grant) was completed. Review findings and recommendations were presented and
discussed in a workshop organized by MoLD on November 28, 2011 with the participation of
Government representatives (Local Development, Education, Health, Women and Social Affairs, etc),
development partners and the banking sector,
The coming weeks are critical to ensure timely launching of the HH registration process and
9.
procuring essential services to support implementation (e.g. MIS, benefit payments). Hence, the review
team strongly recommends very close monitoring of the agreed actions as detailed in Section VI. As
important, MoLD needs to that ensure sufficient procurement and financial management (FM) capacity
is provided to achieve timely and quality implementation.
III.

Review, issues and recommendations of the pilot design and system development

Extensive technical discussions were held by the review team and the government team on
10.
refining the pilot project design, the key program operations systems throughout the program cycle and
the implementation timeframe. The subsequent sections outline these discussions, recommendations and
agreements.
Information and communication campaign: A draft information and communications strategy
11.
has been prepared. The strategy outlines the main issues pertinent to HDSPP communication activities.
Three main strategic communication priorities have been identified to support the HDSPP's efforts to:
increase participation in household registration; increase the accountability of the targeted educational
scholarship; and advocate for the adoption of successful piloted innovations. Target audience,
communication methods and the key messages and information to be conveyed are summarized in the
strategy paper. Next steps are to finalize the strategy and start work on producing the communication
materials including timeline and strategy implementation plan. MOLD will finalize the strategy (with
UNCDF support) by December 15 and launch the campaign by January 15, 2012 and a month before HH
registration starts. The information and communication strategy will be approved by the Steering
Committee.
Household Registration: A complete and functional household registration system serves as a
12.
solid basis for planning and budgeting purposes and helps to identify households who qualify for different
programs or potentially need support. The pilot will support the two project districts (Kanchanpur and
Dadeldhura) in updating and computerizing the existing household registers and assist VDC secretaries in
keeping these registers updated. The registration data will be used to identify eligible households for
participation in the pilot program. MoLD has a particular interest in revitalizing the family folders, and
the registration activity will support the VDCs in creating a family folder per household registered. The

3
information collected will also assist VDCs in identifying wards / households without the necessary
certificates and provide the means to double-check the present beneficiary lists for the social grants.
13.
Targeting: To test the effectiveness of approaches other than the current categorical
targeting in reaching the poorest households, Poverty-based targeting has been agreed to be one of the key
design features of HDSPP. Discussions during the review have concerned the exact methodology for
identifying the poor. The main options explored and discussed extensively during the consultation
include targeting based on Proxy Means Testing (PMT) and the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI).
The PMT approach is an established targeting methodology that ranks households according to their
predicted per capita consumption levels. The MPI seeks to by-pass consumption-based ranking of
household by considering a three-dimensional index of deprivations. The proposed three dimensions
include economic wellbeing (or standard of living), education, and social exclusion with each dimension
assigned an equal weight. While both PMT and MPI approaches support poverty targeting, simulations
reveal that they are likely to rank households differently and produce different beneficiary lists.
14.
It has been agreed that the HDSPP will use both the PMT and MPI for targeting and will
assess their respective performance. It is proposed that one of the pilot districts will target households
using the PMT, while the other pilot district will use the MPI for targeting. In both districts adequate
information for computing both the PMT and MPI scores will be collected through the HH registration
process, resulting in two lists. While only one of these lists will be used to select beneficiaries, the two
lists are required for the purpose of evaluating the effectiveness of each method. A targeting evaluation
exercise will compare the PMT and MPI household rankings from a sample of VDCs to community
rankings of those households. Next steps include: (i) updating the PMT and MPI formulas; (ii) finalizing
the targeting section of the registration form to reflect any changes in the PMT and MPI formulas; and
(iii) finalizing the evaluation framework for assessing the effectiveness of PMT and MPI targeting. These
steps will be supported by World Bank and UNCDF technical teams and will be finalized by December
30, 2011.
15.
Verifications and Grievance: The processes for verifying the accuracy of information
collected during registration and for supporting households to register complaints - both with regards to
the accuracy of registration information and with regards to the final targeting decision - were discussed
in detail with counterparts from MoLD, MoE, and UNCDF. It was decided that the information gathered
during registration will be self-attested by households at the time of registration. Households will be
required to provide the relevant vital event registration certificates (such as birth certificates) in order to
qualify for the scholarship. If a household is unable to provide the required vital event certificate, the
household will be given a grace period during which they may submit the certificate and/or school
enrollment records to the VDC secretary. During the grace period, the VDC secretary will maintain a list
of households that have submitted additional vital event certificates. The registration firm will collect this
information at the end of the grace period. VDC secretaries will be required to sign off on the basic
details of each household (such as the number of children) after registration but will not be required to
attest to all details collected during registration. Due to cost and time constraints, households will not be
provided a copy of the data collected during registration either at the time of registration or afterwards.
16.
It was further decided that households would be given an opportunity to register a complaint
if they feel that they have been unfairly excluded from the program. In a separate discussion on targeting,
it was decided that the ward citizens' forums would be allowed to recommend additional households
which they feel have been unfairly excluded from the scholarship program. The final decision of
excluded beneficiaries will be taken by District Social Protection Coordination Committee (DSPCC)
based on the complaints submitted trough Village Development Committee (VDC). The grievance
process will be timed so that those households with a complaint may register this complaint before the

4
ward citizens' forum makes a decision on which additional households to nominate (details of the process
and timeframe to be worked out in the operations manual).
Management Information System: The Terms of Reference drafted for the design,
17.
development and implementation of the MIS system broadly covers two tasks: (i) Task 1 addresses the
immediate MIS/IT needs for HDSP pilot implementation, (ii) Task 2 is to build a comprehensive MIS
system with an aim to automating all Cash Transfer programs under the MoLD (except the Cash for Work
program) into a single MIS IT platform thereby establishing a I wide system. While a single TOR has
been developed comprising the above two tasks, Task 1 is funded under HDSPP and Task 2 will be
funded by the Social Safety Net Project (SSNP). Key functions of the MIS system include: automating all
Cash Transfer programs into a single MIS platform, maintaining an applicant and beneficiary database,
generating eligible beneficiary lists for cash payments, and generating various MIS reports for planning
and monitoring purposes.
The MIS scope of work covers all the necessary IT services required to address the needs
18.
outlined for both Task I and Task 2 such as IT implementation support staff in 12 districts for
handholding, capacity building and MIS user training at various levels (center, districts, VDC staff) for
further scaling up by the I in the remaining districts. The scope also includes the data network
connectivity at the I, District and some VDCs for MIS implementation as well as the procurement of
necessary hardware (such as servers, UPS, printers, switches) and other IT equipment such as computer
chairs and tables, laptops etc. The service provider will establish a robust data center for hosting MIS
databases and servers including the provision of establishing the data backup site for regular MIS data
backups. Importantly, the underlying design architecture of the proposed MIS system is expected to be
highly secure, modular and open architecture to address the current and future system integration aspects
and scalability (such as linkages with the Vital Events systems, National ID, EMIS, Pension system etc).
Evaluation: The strategy for evaluating the various components of the pilot was discussed with
19.
counterparts from MoLD, MoE, and UNCDF. Given the pilot nature of the project, evaluation will be
particularly important as it will be critical to learn which of the various components of the project are
effective and which are not. Therefore, the evaluation will be limited to the overall objectives of HDSPP
and the identified intermediate results reviewed by the team.
Key research questions related to these intermediate results and for which the evaluation will
20.
seek answers were presented and discussed. Given the decision to pilot the use of both the MPI and PMT
for targeting, it was agreed that comparing the relative effectiveness of these two targeting methods will
be particularly important.
Given the short time span of the project as well as the nature of the project focus on process
21.
modalities and delivery approaches, it was agreed that it is not feasible to undertake rigorous impact
evaluations of the effect of scholarship grants on education outcomes. Process studies will be used to
assess administrative and other processes to shed light on the use of performance incentives, the
implementation of the new MIS, the payment mechanism and other project activities. In addition, the
evaluation will include a cost effectiveness study to estimate the relative cost effectiveness of the pilot
intervention versus other potential interventions.

5
IV.

Implementation Progress of the Bank-administered grant

Progress towards Project Objectives
22.
The specific objective to be achieved by the activities supported under the Bank-administered
grant is " to improve the delivery of cash-based social safety nets in pilot districts of Nepal through
technical assistance and capacity building to the I ofLocal Development".
23.

The agreed end of project targets are:
*
*

90% of intended pilot beneficiaries receive cash transfers on time according to Pilot
Operational Guidelines; and
80% of pilot transfer recipient households report satisfaction with program implementation.

24.
As project signing took place only in August 2011, it is too early to assess the outcomes as
delivery of scholarships has not begun. However, specific implementation actions under all three
components are progressing towards achieving the project objective. Detailed implementation procedures
have been prepared and a draft operations manual is under review. Project management and support
teams at central as well as regional levels are appointed, the central team is functional and the regional
team will be fully functional by early January 2012. A draft communication strategy has been developed,
district selection completed and the household targeting methodology is being finalized. Terms of
Reference and Requests for Proposals for the HH registration, MIS development, and payment delivery
are under review by the Bank and UNCDF teams. Lastly, the project evaluation scope and research
questions have been agreed, and the Terms of Reference for the evaluation services are under preparation.
Procurement of evaluation services is expected by February 2012. Despite this good progress, as a result
of the short implementation period due to the current closing date of the trust fund (RSR-MDTF) and
further restrictions due to the delay in processing the grant agreements, there is a significant risk that a
number of key interventions (e.g. evaluation) will not be completed by the grant closing date of
September 30, 2012.
Component progress
25.
Component 1: Strengthening institutional capacity to design and implement the HDSP (US$
0.8 million). This component provides technical assistance and training to develop the project systems.
Four elements were identified to be supported: (i) a review of current cash transfer programs; (ii) design
of operational systems including targeting, enrollment, payment, and case management; (iii) design of a
web portal and Management Information System (MIS) where the MIS will be integrated at the central
and local DDC/VDC levels with technical assistance provided to establish monitoring mechanisms for
schools, banks or other payment centers, communities and households; and (iv) training and capacity
building on system implementation at central and local levels. The major portion of this component is
managed by the Bank team using the Bank-administered portion of the grant.
26.
A thorough review of key cash transfer programs (e.g. old age pension, single women
allowance, and disability allowance) implemented by MoLD was conducted. As part of the review, the
systems and processes of these programs were documented in depth. In addition, the strengths and
weaknesses of the cash transfer program were analyzed and several recommendations for program
improvements were proposed. Results from the review were presented and discussed in detail with
counterparts from the Population and Vital Events Registration Section. Further, the review findings and
recommendations were presented and discussed in a workshop on November 28, 2011 with the
participation of Government representatives (Local Development, Education, Health, Women and Social
Affairs, etc), development partners and the banking sector. The review findings and recommendations

6
provide good guidance for HDSPP implementation as well as ongoing policy dialogue on the delivery of
cash transfers. The final report will be delivered to MoLD by December 15, 2011.
Technical assistance has been provided by the World Bank and UNCDF for the design of the
27.
operational systems including all elements that are presented and discussed in Section II of this aide
memoire. Revisions to the operational systems as agreed during the review will be incorporated in the
project documents and shared for wider dissemination/consultations in a planned national workshop in
January 2012. The functional requirement of the MIS, technical specifications, and ToRs/RFPs for
procuring MIS/IT services are under finalization. It is expected that the EOI for MIS/IT services will be
advertized by December 20, 2011. A draft project operations manual has been prepared with support from
the UNCDF team. It was agreed to revise/finalize the manual based on the review findings and
agreements by January 15, 2012. The UNCDF team will take the lead in supporting MoLD to finalize the
operations manual. The Operation Manual will be approved by MOLD.
The Terms of Reference and other relevant procurement documents for the household
28,
registration service were reviewed during this consultation. ToRs will need to be revised to reflect the
decisions reached with the team. MoLD will send the revised ToRs/EOI to the Bank for no objection by
December 10, 2011.
Component 2: Implementation of the HDSPP (US$ 0.6 million). The component provides
29.
goods and services required to implement the pilot in the two selected districts (Kanchanpur and
Dadeldhura). Among other activities implementation will involve: (i) provision of core computer
hardware for local offices; (ii) supplies and forms for enrollment; (iii) creation of the beneficiary
database; (iv) establishing the MIS system and necessary connectivity between localities and the center;
and (v) providing linkages with payment systems. Specific items will be agreed jointly with MoLD,
UNCDF and the Bank teams. The cash transfer payments to beneficiaries in the pilot districts are
provided through UNCDF funding.
The scholarship grants are funded by UNCDF and are expected to cover 24,000 poor students
30.
in grades (1-8) in the two selected districts (Kanchanpur and Dadeldhura). Terms of Reference and RFP
packages for payment service providers are under finalization. A briefing workshop for interested service
providers was organized and delivered by UNCDF/MoLD in May 2011. The EOI is expected to be
advertized by December 20, 2011.
The review team revisited the implementation schedule and it expected that the first payment
31.
to students will only be delivered in August 2012 (Annex 2). This means the project would have
delivered only one of three payments by the Bank-administered grant closing date (September 30, 2012).
MoLD and UNCDF have extended the project closing date to July 2013.
Component 3: Evaluating the HDSPP (US$ 0.6 million). This component supports the
32.
design and implementation of an evaluation of the pilot program. The Bank is providing technical
assistance through the Bank-executed grant for the evaluation design, implementation support and data
analysis. MoLD will hire a national firm to undertake the evaluation activities in the field and the data
entry. During review, as elaborated in Section II, the scope of work and types of evaluation studies have
been discussed and agreed. The Bank will work with MoLD to finalize the evaluation design note and

7
prepare ToRs for an international evaluation consultant, as well as the ToRs for the national firm by
December 30, 2011.

Implementation arrangement and capacity
33.
The project has implementation arrangements at three levels: national, district and local. At the
national level, the Steering Committee, chaired by MoLD and co-chaired by MOE, makes decisions
regarding the structure and processes of the pilot. The Steering Committee includes members from
MoLD, MoE, MoF, NPC, and donor representatives (as observers). To date there have been three
Steering Committee meetings held. These meetings have been fruitful in ensuring all engaged
stakeholders are up to date on the project achievements as well as providing the project with policy and
design guidance. However the technical committee that was agreed on has yet to be formed, though
recent discussions suggest that its role may not be necessary. The day-to-day management of the pilot
lies with the Vital Registration and Population Section (VRPS)/LGCPD. A Safety Net Specialist has also
joined MoLD and has been supporting the ministry in that capacity for the last five months. This
specialist has been critical in ensuring coordination and improved pace of implementation. Support by
the External TA Pool (including on TA on targeting, MIS, evaluation, payment) has been provided by the
Bank (through the Bank-executed grant) and UNCDF.
34.
Implementation arrangements at the district and local levels reflect the national level
institutional arrangement. Coordination is to be led by District Social Security Committee chaired by
District Development Committee (DDC) with support from District Education Office (DEO) and a DDC
co-chaired sub-committee on education. In addition, for implementation support to the VRPS sub-section
at the district level, there will be a MIS specialist and a social protection coordinator for each district. At
the local Village Development Committee (VDC) level, support to the VDC will be through existing
entities i.e.: Identity Card Recommendation Committee (ICRC) and Village Education Committee (VEC).
These will be supported by a Social Mobilizer, School Management Committee, Community Learning
Center, Citizen Awareness Center and District Team are all planned.
35.
Progress at the district and local level: the recruitment process for a MIS specialist and a social
protection coordinator for each district has been completed with the expectation that they will be in place
by January 1, 2012. Given the range of actors, clarity on mandates of each entity and clear
communication about the specific roles of each entity needs to be worked on further elaborated in
operations manual (Chapter 2).
Implementation Schedule
36.
Detailed discussions on the implementation timeframe made it clear that despite plans for an
increase in the implementation pace in the coming days and weeks, the first payments to the beneficiaries
would not be made before August 2012. With the current closing date of the Bank-administered grant,
pilot evaluation activities can not implemented. This would mean a lost opportunity to test the effect of
the new approaches and modalities to delivering cash transfers and hence the project can be evaluated for
achievement of its objectives. This was raised as an issue of great concern by the Government and coFinancier. The Government informed the team at the last HDSP steering committee meeting that the
project was extended until end of July 2013 by MoLD and UNCDF. MoLD requested the Bank to
explore the possibility for grant extension to align with the June 2013 date and informed us of an official
request will be sent to the Bank soon

8
Procurement
A comprehensive procurement plan (PP) for the current FY 2011-12 already cleared by the
37.
Bank was discussed during the review. The PP includes procurement of goods, consulting services and
non-consulting services. Considering the project span to be only one year, most of the procurement
activities have been planned to be initiated simultaneously. This has created an increased work load for
the project procurement team. Staff that have been working on the project procurement over the last few
months do not have adequate procurement experience and skill to prepare procurement documents. The
issue of procurement capacity was raised by the review team. MoLD agreed to provide procurement
support through the LGCDP procurement team. The review team strongly recommends the provision of
continuous procurement support to enable timely and quality implementation of the procurement
activities over the following weeks. If needed the project could consider hiring a procurement consultant.
Discussions also focused on the planned procurement activities in terms of the need for better
38.
slicing and packaging of some activities, cost estimates to reflect current market rates and size of slices,
and the addition of new procurement activities as needed. The procurement of consulting services for
registration and the MIS system design and development were discussed in depth from technical,
procurement and budget perspectives. In order to reflect all these changes and requirements, it was
agreed that MoLD will revise/update the current PP and submit to the Bank for its review and clearance

by December 10, 2011.

Financial Management
IDA financial management (FM) team discussed the status of initial actions needed in order to
39.
initiate financial activities under World Bank-administered Trust Fund. The project reported that they are
in the process of completing those actions and will inform the team in due course. A qualified accounts
officer was assigned during the review. The team suggested the project move quickly on these key
actions at the earliest possible time as these are necessary to initiate disbursements under this Trust Fund.
Pending key actions to be undertaken by MOLD include: subconsultation of the authorized signatory
letter, opening of the Nepalese Rupee designated account at Nepal Rastra Bank, and registration in the
client Connection.
V.
40.

Donor Coordination and Consultation
The review team participated in the Social Protection Development Partners group (SPTT)

meeting held on November 21, 2011.

Participants included representatives of UNICEF, ILO, WFP,

ADB, UNCDF and WB. A number of these representatives have participated in previous discussions
during project preparation.
The review team presented an update on the project design and
implementation progress. The team presented targeting options under consideration as well as key
evaluation questions. The group stressed that the targeting approach should enhance social cohesion by
ensuring that local communities are aware of and support the basis on which beneficiaries are selected.
The group supported the project focus on evaluation to enable testing the new approaches to the
management and delivery of cash transfers, while at the same time stressing the need to avoid loading

the evaluation design with elements irrelevant to the specific objectives of the pilot. To inform policy,
the group advised to add a cost effectiveness analysis to the evaluation in order to compare the cost of
delivering cash transfers using the new modalities versus the current practice.
41.
The review team appreciates the input and insight provided during these discussions and
reflected the discussion points in the follow-on meetings with the government. The review team

9
informed the group about the workshop planned by MoLD on November 28, 2011 to present the findings
of the cash transfer programs review undertaken by the World Bank.

V.

Agreed Actions and Next Steps

42.

The table below outlines the agreed-upon actions.

Actions to be taken

By when

Responsibility

Open and inform IDA of project Designated Account and

Dec. 21, 2011

MoLD/MOF

Dec. 21, 2011
Dec. 21, 2011

MoLD
MoLD

IDA no objection for registration and MIS RFPs
Advertise EOI for Registration and MIS consultancy services
Prepare requirements and specification of equipments and
office furniture
Advertize EOI for payment service provider
Update the targeting models and PMT/MPI formulas
Finalize operations manual
Finalize the evaluation design note and prepare ToRs for
evaluation consultant and national team
Update project operations manual
Finalize communication strategy
Delivery of final report of the cash transfer programs review

Dec. 25, 2011
Jan. 5, 2012
Jan. 15, 2012

Bank
MoLD
MoLD

Dec.
Dec.
Dec.
Dec.

2011
2011
2011
2011

UNCDF
Bank
UNCDF/MOLD
Bank

Jan. 15, 2012
Dec. 30, 2011
Dec. 25, 2011

MoLD/UNCDF
UNCDF/MoLD
Bank

Registration in Client Connection

Dec 21, 2011

signatures

Send updated procurement plan to Bank for no objection
Send revised household registration and MIS ToR/EOI to the
Bank for no objection request

31,
30,
30,
30,

10
Annex 1
List of the people involved in Review
Name
Government team
Sheetal Babu Regmee
Teertha Raj Dhakal
Bishnu Prashad Gauli
Hari Lamsal
Roshan Shankar Ghimire
Pratap Chhatkuli
UNCDF team
Neil Webster
Rojee Joshi
Esther Schiiring
World Bank team
Afrah Al-Ahmadi
John D. Blomquist
Jasmine Rajbhandary
Denis Nikitin
Doug Johnson
Ashish Joshi
Shambhu Prasad Uprety
Yogesh Bom Malta
Anam Basnet
Jaya Karki

Position

Institution

Secretary
Joint secretary
Under Secretary
Under Secretary
Section officer
National SSN consultant

MOLD
MOLD
MOLD
MOE
MOLD
MOLD

Decentralization and Local Governance Adviser
Program officer
Safety Net Specialist, consultant

UNCDF
UNCDF
UNCDF

Task team leader
Lead Social Protection Economist
Social Protection Specialist
Targeting Specialist, consultant
Payments Specialist, consultant
IT Specialist, consultant
Procurement Specialist
Financial management analyst
Junior professional associate
Program Assistant

WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB

Social Protection Development Partners (SPTT)

Nita Neupane
Beth Verhey
Thakur Dhakal
Riikka.Mikkola
Nicolas Oberlin
Arun Rana
Neil Webster
Rojee Joshi
Afrah Al-Ahmadi
Jasmine Rajbahandary
Denis Nikitin
Doug Johnson
Ashish Joshi

Programme Officer
Chief, Social Policy
Program Officer
JPO
Deputy Country Director
Programme officer ( Social Protection)
Decentralization and Local Governance Advisor
Program Officer
Sr. Human Development Specialist
Social Protection Specialist
Targeting Specialist
Payment Specialist
IT specialist

_

ILO
UNICEF
UNICEF
WFP
WFP
ADB
UNCDF
UNCDF
WB
WB
WB
WB
WB

11

Annex 2
Detailed Implementation Schedule
Key Actions

Timeframe I
(current RSR
grant closing Sept 2012)

Timeframe II
(MOLDIUNCDF
current closing
date - June 2013)

MIS EO1
MIS contract signed

15-Dec-I1
29-Feb-12

15-Dec-I1
29-Feb-12

registration EOI

7-Dec-I I

7-Dec- 11

registration contract signed

29-Feb-12

29-Feb-12

registration completed n entered

30-May-12

30-May-12

Payment service provider EOI
Payment service provider contract signed

30-Dec-11

30-Dec- 11

30-Mar-12

30-Mar-12

information campai gn
Registration of households

March-April 2012
April-May 2012

March-April 2012
April-May 2012

targeting result (first beneficiary list)
local verification process (ward, VDC)

7-Jun-12

7-Jun-12

29-Jun-12

29-Jun-12

grievance/verification

29-Jun-12

29-Jun-12

final beneficiary list ready
MIS for beneficiaries ready

30-Jul-12
15-May-12

29-Jun-12
15-May-12

full MIS ready

30-Jul-12

30-Jul-12

payment system ready
payment I
payment 2

30-May-12
1-Aug-12

30-Aug-12
1-Sep-12
1-Sep-12
1-Jan-13

payment 3
payment 4(year 2)
payment 5(year 2)
payment 6 (year 2)
Evaluation

Feb- May 2013

Workshop

Jun-13

End of WB funding

Sep 12

Jun-13

