Public Disclosure Authorized

Document o f
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Public Disclosure Authorized

Report No: 43172-NP

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

EMERGENCY PROJECT PAPER
FOR A

Public Disclosure Authorized

PROPOSED GRANT

I N THE AMOUNT OF SDR 31.3 M I L L I O N
(US$50 M I L L I O N EQUIVALENT)
TO
NEPAL
FOR AN
EMERGENCY PEACE SUPPORT PROJECT

Public Disclosure Authorized

April 21,2008

Human Development Unit
Nepal Country Management Unit
South Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance o f t h e i r o f f i c i a l duties. I t s contents may n o t otherwise be disclosed
without World Bank authorization.

Currency and Equivalents
(Exchange Rate Effective April 1,2008)

Currency Unit = Nepali Rupee (NRs.)
US$1 = NRs. 63.7
NRs =US$0.016

Fiscal Year
July 15 -July 14

Abbreviations and Acronyms

23PA
ARCS
CA
CBO
CDD
CDO
CFAA
CPA
CQ
DFID
DOs
DOA
DO1
DTCO
EPP
ERTA
ERW
EU
FAR
FM
FPR
GON
GTZ
IC
ICLA
IDPs
IEC
INSEC
IPR
IRC
IN
S
LPCS
MIS
MOF
MOPR
NCB

23 Point Agreement
Audit Report Compliance System
Constituent Assembly
Community Based Organization
Community Driven Development
Chief District Officer
Country Financial Accountability Assessment
Comprehensive Peace Accord
Consultant Qualifications
Department for International Development (UK)
Development Objectives
Department o f Agriculture
Department o f Industry
District Treasury Controller Office
Emergency Project Paper
Economic Reform Technical Assistance
Explosive Remnants o f Conflict
European Union
Financial Administration Regulations
Financial Management
Financial Procedures Regulations
Government o f Nepal
German Agency for Technical Cooperation
Individual Consultants
Information, Counseling and Legal Assistance
Internally Displaced people
Information Education Campaigns
Informal Sector Service Center
Implementation Progress Report
International Rescue Committee
Interim Strategy Note
Local Peace Committees
Management Information System
Ministry o f Finance
Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction
National Competitive Bidding

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NGO
NPC
NPTF
N B
R
NRC
OAG
OTI
OPBP
PAF
PC
PEFA
PEM
PFAA
PFM
PMT
QBS
QCBS
RR
SOEs
SPA
SPP
TA
TFs
TORS
USAID
UNDP
UNFPA
UNICEF
UNMIN

Non-Governmental Organization
National Planning Commission
Nepal Peace Trust Fund
Nepal Rastra Bank
Norwegian Refugee Council
Office o f Auditor General
Office o f Transitional Initiatives
Operational Policy/Business Policy
Poverty Alleviation Fund
Peace Commission
Public Expenditure Financial Accountability
Public Expenditure Management
Public Financial Accountability Assessment
Public Financial Management
Project Management Team
Quality Based Selection
Quality and Cost Based Selection
Rapid Response Operation
Statements o f Expenditures
Seven Party Alliance
Simplified Procurement Plan
Technical Assistance
Trust Funds
Terms o f Reference
United States Agency for International Development
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Mission in Nepal

Vice President:
Country Director:
Sector Manager:
Task Team Leaders:

Praful Patel, SARVP
Susan G. Goldmark, SACNP
Mansoora Rashid, SASHD
Philip O’Keefe, SASHD
Roshan Bajracharya, SASPR

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance o f
their official duties. I t s contents may not be otherwise disclosed without W o r l d Bank authorization.

NEPAL
Emergency Peace Support Project

CONTENTS
Emergency Project Paper (EPP) Data Sheet

1

A. Introduction
B. Emergency Challenge: Country Context, Recovery Strategy and Rationale for
Emergency Project

2

C. Bank Response and Strategy

4

D. Appraisal o f Project Activities, Benefits, and Risks

9

E. Implementation Arrangements and Financing Plan

12

F. Project Risks and Mitigating Measures

15

G. Terms and Conditions for Project Financing

16

Annexes

Annex 1.

Detailed Description o f Project Components

18

Annex 2.

Results Framework and Monitoring

22

Annex 3.

Summary o f Estimated Project Costs

27

Annex 4.

Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements

28

Annex 5.

Procurement Arrangements

39

Annex 6.

Implementation and Monitoring Arrangements

43

Annex 7.

Project Preparation and Appraisal Team Members

44

Annex 8.

Documents in Project Files

45

Annex 9.

Support o f UN agencies, bilaterals and others for peace process

46

Annex 10.

Statement o f Loans and Credits

49

RAPID RESPONSE OPERATION PROJECT PAPER DATA SHEET

Nepal
Emergency Peace Support Project
South Asia Region
Date: April 21, 2008
Country Director: Susan G. Goldmark (SACNP)
Sector Manager: Mansoora Rashid (SASHD)
Lending instrument: Rapid Response Lending (OPBP
8.0)

Team Leaders: Philip O’Keefe
(SASHD) and Roshan Bajracharya
(SASPR)
Sectors: Other social services
Themes: Conflict prevention and postconflict reconstruction, Social risk
mitigation
Environmental screening category: C

Project ID ( s ) : PE-P 110762

Project ID(s): PE-P110762

Total Amount: US$50 mln. (3 1.3 million SDR)

Proposed terms: IDA Grant

Expected implementation period: 3 years

Expected effectiveness date: June 15,2008

Expected closing date: June 30, 201 1

Borrower: Ministry o f Finance, Government o f
Nepal

Responsible agency: Ministry o f Peace and
Reconstruction, Government o f Nepal

Development Objective: The overall objective o f the project i s to contribute t o the consolidation o f
the Nepal peace process by supporting: (i)
Government to meet commitments to selected groups
affected by the conflict, including families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict, conflict-related
widows and orphans, disabled people, and individual Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
ensuring
transparency in implementation o f benefits under the Project for the conflict-affected groups,
strengthening o f key institutions which are tasked
including the Maoists in cantonments; and (ii)
with policy and implementation functions in peace building, reintegration and rehabilitation.

Short Description: The proposed grant would help finance the costs associated with commitments o f
the Government o f Nepal (GON) to post-conflict recovery interventions related t o the peace process
for identified groups. The proposed support will help respond t o the situation by: (i)
financing
agreed payments and reintegration interventions to selected groups affected by the conflict,
including families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict, conflict-related widows and orphans, and
financing agreed periodic payments to individual Maoists in cantonments in
disabled people; (ii)
respect o f implementation o f the Comprehensive Peace Accord; and (iii)
capacity building and
technical assistance to GON t o perform i t s peace building, reintegration and rehabilitation functions
in the post-conflict period.

Source
Borrower
Total IDA (Grant)
Trust Funds
Others
Total

I

Total

Local

Foreign

47.2

2.8

50.0

47.2

2.8

50.0

2007

2008

2009

2010

Total IDA Grant
38.0
9.0
Trust Funds
Does the emergency operation require any exceptions from Bank policies?
Have these been approved by Bank management?

201 1

2012

3.0
Yes[ ] N o [ x ]
Yes [ ] N o [XI

Are there any critical risks rated “substantial” or “high”?
Yes
What safeguard policies are triggered, if any?

[XI [
No

None

]

A.

Introduction

1.
This Project Paper seeks the approval o f the Executive Directors t o provide a grant in an
amount o f US$50 million equivalent (SDR 31.3 million) to Nepal for an Emergency Peace
Support Project. The Project has been prepared in accordance with OPBP 8.00, Rapid Response
to Crises and Emergencies.
2.
The proposed grant would help finance the costs associated with commitments o f G O N including i t s major coalition partners in the Seven Party Alliance (SPA) - t o post-conflict
recovery interventions related t o the peace process for identified groups. The proposed support
will help respond t o the situation by: (i)financing agreed payments and reintegration
interventions t o selected groups affected by the conflict, including families o f those killed as a
financing
result o f the conflict, conflict-related widows and orphans, and disabled people; (ii)
agreed periodic payments t o individual Maoists in cantonments in respect o f implementation o f
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement’; and (iii)
capacity building and technical assistance to
G O N to perform i t s peace building, reintegration and rehabilitation functions in the post-conflict
period.
The expected outcomes include contributing to the consolidation o f the Nepal peace
3.
improved compliance with the 23 Point Agreement as a result o f timely
process by supporting: (i)
delivery o f benefit payments to families o f deceased and individual Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
improved trust between the parties t o the 23 Point Agreement; (iii)
ensuring transparency in
implementation o f benefits under the Project for the conflict-affected groups, including the
Maoists in cantonments; (iv) development o f a medium term strategy for reintegration and
rehabilitation o f conflict-affected populations; and (v) robustly designed and piloted interventions
to support reintegration o f conflict-affected populations into social and economic life.

4.
Partnership arrangements: While there i s no explicit co-financing for the operation
from other agencies, a variety o f agencies are involved in the broader efforts supporting the peace
process. This includes support to reintegration o f former combatants who are minors, support to
families o f those killed in the conflict and families displaced by the conflict, and related issues
such as security force reform. The United Nations agencies include UNICEF, UNDP, UNFPA,
and UNMIN, the European Union (EU) i s providing ongoing support, and bilaterals include the
UK Department for International Development (DFID), German Agency for Technical
Cooperation (GTZ), the Governments o f Denmark, Finland, Switzerland, United States Agency
for International Development (USAID) and others. In addition, a host o f international and local
NGOs are involved in provision o f specific services to the target populations, including
Norwegian Refugee Council, International Rescue Committee, and the Save the Children
Alliance. The Bank team has benefited from the inputs o f these partners during project
preparation (including DFID Peer Review), and has initiated structured coordination through
participation in meetings o f the Nepal Peace Trust Fund (NPTF), the key vehicle for bringing
together Government and donors to discuss policy, institutional, financing and implementation
issues related t o the peace process. The project will be harmonized to the maximum extent
possible with the N P T F (see below on Institutional Issues).

As agreed with GON at Negotiations, ‘‘Maoists in cantonment” means those beneficiaries encamped in
cantonments, as per the Comprehensive Peace Accord dated November 21,2006, who have subsequently
been verified by the United Nations Mission in Nepal through i t s two-stage verification process, and who
are eligible for benefits under the Project.

B.

Emergency Challenge: Country Context, Recovery Strategy and Rationale for
Proposed Bank Emergency Project

5.
Nepal i s one o f the poorest countries in the world, averaging GDP per capita o f US$270
in 2005, with adverse, though in some cases improving, social indicators. Despite this, the
country has made substantial progress in poverty reduction in the decade t o 2003104, with the
headcount rate falling from 42 to 31 percent. This i s remarkable considering that an armed
conflict ran from 1996 t o 2006 which imposed a heavy toll in terms o f human lives: over 14,000
people were killed, many displaced (with estimates over recent years ranging from around 25,000
to around 100,000 people), and others disabled or “disappeared”. As such, unresolved tensions
remain in many parts o f the country.
6.
In the past t w o years, a fragile peace has been sustained - though not without ongoing
unrest and periodic political setbacks - and important steps have been taken towards a “new
Nepal”. This includes establishment o f the Seven Party Alliance (SPA) in November 2005 with
involvement o f the Maoists, ending o f royal rule in April 2006 and immediate establishment o f an
interim SPA Government, signing o f a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) between the
Government o f Nepal and the Communist Party (CPN-Maoist) in November 2006 and
subsequently C P N - M joined government in April 2007, and promulgation o f an interim
Constitution in 2007. Elections were held on April 10, 2008 for a Constituent Assembly (CA)
which will draft a new Constitution and be the basis for formation o f a new government. The
elections were judged by observers t o have been credible, and initial results indicate a strong
performance for the CPN-Maoist.* However, final results will not be known for several weeks,
and hence the final political composition o f the new Government remains t o be seen. The C A
elections had twice been postponed, the second postponement induced by a short-lived Maoist
withdrawal from the coalition in late 2007. The Maoists re-entered Government following the
signing o f the 23 Point Agreement (23PA) between the members o f the SPA in December 2007.
7.
A second set o f developments over the past year has been considerable unrest - including
bandhs (strikes, stoppages and blockades), intermittent violence (including killings), disruption o f
non-Madhesi political meetings, etc. - in the Tarai region by groups promoting the interests o f
M a d h e ~ i s . However, at the end o f February 2008, agreements were signed between GON and
~
major Madhesi political blocs which should help to calm such tensions. These agreements,
however, will imply significant financial obligations for the incoming government which will
create additional pressure on fiscal resources.
8.
N o w that the CA elections have been conducted in a timely and effective manner, the
post-electoral period will open up a new set o f challenges to the peace and nation-building
processes. While the CPN-Maoist appears set to take over the leadership o f the new Government,
both processes will require sustained confidence building between a l l stakeholders. The most
2

The CA will be comprised o f 601 members, o f whom 240 were directly elected on a fmt-past-the-post
basis, with a further 335 members elected on the basis o f proportional representation and 26 members
appointed by the Council o f Ministers on a consensus basis. International observers who have judged the
elections a success include the EU Election Observer Mission, the Asian Network for Free Elections, and
the Carter Center.
Twenty two districts in the southern plains bordering India make up the Tarai, alternately known as
Madhesi. The Tarai occupies 17 percent o f Nepal’s total land area and i s home to nearly 48 percent o f the
population, including migrants from the hills. According to official statistics, 3 1.2 percent o f Nepal’s total
population i s o f Madhesi origin.

2

immediate will be the composition o f the new Government, for which it remains unclear at this
stage what parties would j o i n the CPN-Maoist. Another challenge will be meeting the wideranging commitments t o different population groups which have been made in the recent past. A
further key challenge facing Government will be the systematic and substantive review and
reform o f the security system - in particular the political challenge o f the proposed integration o f
the Maoists in cantonments and the fiscal challenge o f sustaining such integration.
9.
These and other challenges will require sustaining the existing level o f confidence among
different political parties and deepening it over time in order to consolidate the peace and start the
transition from an emphasis on post-conflict to developmental policies. Meeting prior
commitments that have financial implications, particularly t o the different groups affected by the
conflict, will be critical t o not only bolster this confidence building and transition process; but
also, protect the on-going pro-poor expenditures initiated during the Tenth Plan.
10.
The 23PA outlines several key agreements between the parties with respect to the
ongoing peace process which provide the specific context for the proposed operation. These
payment o f outstanding allowances to individual Maoists in cantonments, agreement
include: (i)
to make future allowance payments, and to engage in further deliberations o n their reintegration
following eventual release from cantonments; (ii)commitment to provide compensation
provision for rapid release and
payments to families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict; (iii)
payment o f allowances to those in cantonments who were not verified as eligible by reason o f
being under age or having entered cantonment after a prior cut-off date; and (iv) commitment that
private and public property seized during the armed conflict will be returned to concerned
individuals and agencies. Primary responsibility for implementation o f these commitments rests
with the Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction (MOPR).

11.
The details on the official numbers of, and modalities and levels o f payments to various
conflict affected groups have subsequently been outlined in different GON official documents. In
the case o f Maoists in cantonments, the Council o f Ministers affirmed a monthly benefit payment
o f NRs. 3,000 (around US$48) for the period o f confinement in cantonments? For families o f
those killed, the commitments are outlined in a document recently approved by Cabinet.’ The
officially endorsed numbers o n different groups are outlined in a GON Task Force report
mandated by the Council o f Ministers and that was submitted in March 2008.
12.
The institutional architecture in GON for dealing with different aspects o f the peace and
reconstruction process i s summarized in the 23PA. There i s commitment to formation o f several
high level Commissions tasked with guiding different aspects o f the peace process. A key
institution in this respect i s the High Level Peace Commission (PC), intended to be a body with
cross-party representation which acts as the policy and oversight bodya6 It i s required to
coordinate closely with the MOPR. Pending formation o f the PC, GON approved shortly prior t o
elections a Peace and Conflict Management Committee with high level c i v i l society participation.
Apart from governmental institutions, a range o f UN, international and national agencies are
supporting different aspects o f the peace process. The coordinating UN agency i s the United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), a special political mission established by the UN Security
See Letter o f Chief Secretary, dated October 7,2007.
See Norms for Financial Support and Relief o f Conflict Victims.
In addition to the Peace Commission, other relevant institutions mandated in the 23 Point Agreement are:
(i)
Truth and Reconciliation Commission; (ii)
Commission for the Investigation o f the Disappeared; (iii)
High level Committee for Monitoring the Effective Implementation o f the CPA and other Agreements; and
(iv) State Restructuring Commission.

3

Council to support the peace process in Nepal and in particular to assist in the conduct o f the C A
election in a free and fair atmosphere. UNMIN officially began i t s work in January 2007, and i t s
current mandate runs to mid-July 2008.

13.
Given the range o f UN and bilateral players involved in supporting the peace process, the
proposed project has been designed taking into account existing and planned support to the G O N
from other development partners. The key coordinating mechanisms and funding vehicles for
donors involved in supporting the peace process are: (i) Nepal Peace Trust Fund (NPTF)
the
administered by Ministry o f Finance (MOF) and technically supported by MOPR; and (ii) UN
the
Peace Trust Fund for Nepal, administered by the UN and focused o n activities which the
Government i t s e l f i s not able to implement. Both trust funds (TFs) are overseen by a Joint
Steering Committee. Consultations between the project team and the NPTF group have helped to
ensure that the project interventions will avoid duplication o f effort and institutional structures,
but are also complementary in areas where Bank support i s considered useful to leverage greater
impact o f the efforts o f various development partners.
14.
The rationale for Bank involvement has several elements in light o f the request from
G O N for urgent support. The f i r s t i s that the Bank has considerable international experience in
providing support to peace processes, specifically dealing with conflict-affected populations and
those who have participated directly in conflicts. Secondly, the Bank’s strong local presence and
significant resources allow for a speed and level o f project response not possible for many
development partners. Thirdly, the procedures and project management systems required by the
Bank, and the expertise in public expenditure management (PEM) among national Bank staff, are
seen to contribute to enhanced transparency in public financial management o f peace-related
expenditures. Finally, the existing involvement o f the Bank in a range o f development related
sectors relevant to the future integration o f conflict-affected populations provides significant
potential for downstream linkages between the support under the proposed project and various
ongoing and planned developmental activities o f the GON.

C.

Bank Response and Strategy

Brief description o f Bank’s strategy o f emergency support
15.
The Bank’s post-conflict transition support strategy for Nepal i s outlined in the Interim
Strategy Note (ISN) discussed at the Board in February 2007.’ It i s framed around three possible
country scenarios - “stalled transition” where stability holds but development i s very difficult;
“steady transition” where both peace and development are pursued without significant reversals;
and “deterioration scenario”, where the political process fails and the state struggles t o maintain
basic functions. The key themedfocus areas to support the post-conflict transition outlined in the
I S N are: (i)
protecting the reforms already undertaken in selected areas, including in the
education sector, in PFM, and in promoting inclusion through community-based projects and
policy work; and (ii)
supporting a post-conflict economic program (and eventually a new Poverty
Reduction and Development Strategy), including state building, promoting partnerships between
public and private/community sectors, improving governance and promoting inclusive
development. The I S N also envisages possibly supporting the transition t o a more stable political
environment through measures such as support to victims o f the conflict if considered important
to support the peace process and/or protect developmental expenditures.

’IDA Interim Strategy Note for Nepal, January 22,2007.
4

Report No. 381 19-NEP.

Project Development Objectives
16.
The proposed project comes at a critical juncture in Nepal’s history and i s considered to
have an important role in contributing to consolidation o f the peace process and the democratic
transition. The rapid and early commitment to Bank financing o f commitments under the 23PA
also acted as confidence building measure between major parties in the run-up to elections. The
overall objective o f the project i s t o contribute to the consolidation o f the peace process in Nepal
by supporting: (i)
Government t o meet commitments to people affected by the conflict, including
families o f the deceased, orphans, widows and disabled people, and Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
ensuring transparency in implementation o f benefits under the Project for the conflict-affected
groups including the Maoists in cantonments; and (iii)
strengthening o f key institutions which are
tasked with policy and implementation functions in peace building, reintegration and
rehabilitation.

Summary o f Project Components (see Annex 1 also)
17.

The project would consist o f three components:

Transitional safety net payments to Maoists in cantonments during the transition period
(US$18.55 million). Over 19,000 eligible Maoists have been placed in twenty-eight
cantonments (seven central sites and twenty one satellites) following the Peace Accord, with
commitment by political parties to payment o f regular allowances t o reduce the chances o f
disenchantment and t o mitigate against a need for rent-seeking behavior while the Maoists are
encamped. These act in effect as transitional safety net payments. However, 10 months o f
payments were outstanding as o f mid-April 2008, and there are presently no funds budgeted
for forward payments that will be necessary for the months following elections. This
component would finance transitional safety net payments for 19,602 Maoists in
cantonments. The eligible Maoists were registered and verified by a two-stage process
involving the two parties t o the conflict and UNMIN, which conducted a detailed verification
o f each potential beneficiary and issued individual bar-coded identity cards t o those verified.
The verification and registration process i s considered t o have followed good international
practice by Bank and UN staff familiar with similar operations in other countries. The
component would cover both payment arrears from July 2007 and forward payments for the
period to mid-January 2009 for those registered through this process.8 Arrears would be paid
on a one-off basis and forward payments on a regular periodic basis. The benefits would be
paid out to the individual beneficiaries in the form o f individual checks for the initial
payments, with an effort to move to bank account deposits as the payment modality before
the end o f the project-financed period o f benefit^.^ The payment process would involve
administrative officials, Maoists representatives and an agreed independent third party to
witness the payments. Periodic payments would be made according t o an agreed set o f
guidelines which are intended to ensure transparency in the process, and compliance with the
guidelines would be a condition o f disbursement o f project funds for payments. Project
financing would be provided on a reimbursement basis, providing an additional check on
compliance with the agreed procedures. There would also be financing under Component 3
8

T h e breakdown o f the 19,602 is: (i)
18,789 h l l y verified Maoists in cantonments; (ii) Maoists eligible
153
but not in cantonment as providing VIP security services; and (iii) Maoists in cantonments from Phase
660
I1 verification also awaiting final decisions but eligible. For the latter two groups arrears are owed from
November 2006.
The payment method contrasts with the one round o f payments made in 2007, where a lump-sum payment
was made to the Maoist camp commanders for subsequent distribution to those in the cantonment.

5

for a communications campaign to inform beneficiaries o f their entitlements and the payment
process, as well as surveys o f beneficiaries initiated as soon as possible after payments begin
to be made. Finally, GON and the Bank would need to agree, as part o f the payment
guidelines, on a grievance redressal mechanism for beneficiaries in the event o f irregularities
in the payment process. While the ultimate period o f future residence in cantonments i s not
known at this point, a cut-off date has been agreed with GON which balances estimates o f
future need with the need for an exit strategy for the Bank. Benefit payments beyond January
2009 would be expected to be picked up within the budget through a proposal o f
supplementary budget if required. In addition to the financing o f transitional safety net
payments, there would be provision for incremental operating costs associated with delivery
o f benefits in a manner consistent with the Bank and GON's fiduciary standards (e.g.,
logistical costs o f physical delivery o f payments). Assuming payment o f arrears and an
additional nine months o f payments, post-elections, the estimated value o f this component i s
US$18.55 million, o f which US$550,000 would be for incremental operating costs.

Benefits to families o those killed as a result o the conflict and reintegration support to
f
f
other conflict-afSected populations (UU28.23 million). This component would have two
sub-components. The first component would finance benefit payments t o survivor families o f
people killed as a result o f the conflict. Therefore, this component would provide
compensation payments t o 14,000 plus families in the amount o f NRs. 100,000 (US$1570)
per person killed as per GON decision in March 2008. This would be paid as a lump sum,
though payments would in practice be spread over several months to achieve national
coverage. These families were identified through a process conducted under the leadership o f
Chief District Officers (CDOs), with input from several sources to verify eligible families and
with close review by higher levels o f administration and Government. This process i s
therefore considered t o have done a reliable j o b o f identification by national and international
observers o f the process, including identifying the eligible individual in the families o f those
killed who would be entitled to receive the payment." Given the significant lump sum
amount o f the benefit, payments would be required t o be made into bank accounts o f
individual beneficiaries in order to reduce risks. There would also be a set o f guidelines
agreed for the payment process which would be required to be followed as a condition o f
disbursement o f project funds for payments. This would include a role for local third parties
who could advise beneficiaries both during the payment process and subsequently on options
for use o f the funds. As with first component, there would be provision for incremental
operating costs associated with delivery o f benefits in a manner consistent with the Bank and
GON's fiduciary standards. There would also be linked support under Component 3 for a
communications campaign to beneficiaries, special external reviews o f the payment process
and beneficiary surveys which would be implemented from early in the process t o gain
insights into the effectiveness o f the payment procedures and adjust them as necessary for
other districts where payments are made later. There would also need to be a grievance
process agreed as part o f the payment process guidelines. The estimated size o f the payments
and recurrent cost support under the first sub-component i s US$23.23 million, o f which
around US$45 5,000 would be for incremental operating costs.
The second sub-component would provide support for reintegration assistance to other
conflict-affected groups (including, inter alia, people disabled in the conflict; internally
lo
Confidence in the official number o f families with a member killed as a result o f the conflict i s bolstered
by the fact that a national NGO (INSEC) conducted detailed information collection throughout the conflict
on those killed through a network o f local investigators. Their figures on the number o f people killed as a
result o f the conflict and their composition are remarkably close to the official numbers.

6

displaced people (IDPs); families o f persons who have disappeared; minors involved in the
conflict; orphaned children; widows). This could take a variety o f forms (e.g., training; legal
and counseling services; rehabilitation services for disabled people; piloting o f interventions)
and would be elaborated by GON with the assistance o f technical assistance (TA) provided
under the third component and in close consultation with other development partners through
the mechanism o f the Nepal Peace Trust Fund. Given the uncertainty on the specific
reintegration assistance and i t s scale, the team proposes that a dedicated pool be provided in
the project to finance reintegration support for selected conflict-affected groups. This would
be more specifically defined and programmed during the first year o f project implementation,
including through pilot activities, and closely coordinated to maximize complementarity with
the activities o f GON and the development partners. This would be consolidated into
operational guidelines for accessing these funds which would be a condition o f disbursement
for the sub-component, an approach used previously in Nepal under the Economic Reform
Technical Assistance (ERTA) Project. I t i s not expected that the funds proposed would be
sufficient to cover the likely overall reintegration support needs o f these groups. However, as
the policy framework i s elaborated by GON, additional resources could be made available
through either reallocation o f existing funds or seeking supplemental financing as
appropriate. The proposed amount for reintegration support interventions would be
US$Smillion.
0

Capacity building o key institutional structures in support o the peace process and project
f
f
management support (US$3.22 million). This component would have three sub-components:
(i)
capacity building and technical assistance for the Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction to
perform their core functions more effectively. This would include as an immediate priority i t s
oversight role on payments to families o f deceased and Maoists in cantonments (e.g.,
strengthening the M I S system, internal procedures, communications campaigns for
beneficiaries o f project-financed payments, and monitoringheporting, including beneficiary
surveys), and programs for other conflict-affected groups such as orphans, widows, and
disabled people. In addition, it would include technical assistance and capacity building for
performance o f the Ministry’s roles in supporting the peace process, within an overall vision
o f the Ministry as a coordinator rather than executor. This would include training, legal
advisory support for i t s secretariat functions in drafting new policies and procedural
guidelines, advisory services on development o f GON’s overall reintegration strategy and
specific reintegration interventions programs, and capacity for information education
campaigns (IEC) which are considered a critical element in building awareness and
confidence in the overall peace process. The component would promote exposure to best
international practices in reintegration, reconciliation and rehabilitation, devising appropriate
mechanisms for integrating peace and developmental activities, reorienting sectoral ministries
towards conflict-sensitive design o f development projects, and supporting effective
functioning o f the peace focal points in each ministry. The technical assistance under this
component would inform design o f the reintegration support activities for various groups to
be financed under Component 2. I t will be critical to ensure that more specific definition o f
TA support i s done in close coordination with other development partners, several o f which
have or plan for support t o peace and reintegration activities. The proposed vehicle for
ensuring such harmonization o f approach i s the NPTF, pending formation o f the Peace
support
Commission or agreement on such subsequent politically inclusive mechanism; (ii)
for core project implementation tasks o f the Project Management Team (PMT) such as
procurement, financial management (FM), including evaluation o f project interventions
training, workshops and technical
through surveys and other assessment tools; and (iii)
assistance for other actors in the peace process as needed, including the Peace Commission
once formed, the Peace and Conflict Management Committee if required, Local Peace

7

Committees, and other groups such as parliamentarians and possibly other bodies related to
the peace process envisaged in the 23PA.l’ Given the relatively short project implementation
period and nature o f interventions, this component i s estimated to cost US$3.22 million.

Eligibility for Processing under OPBP 8.00

18.
The application o f O P B P 8.00 i s justified for this operation due t o the project’s nature as
well as the need for a rapid and flexible response. Consistent with BP 8.00, the project would
explicitly help to: (i)
facilitate peace building (paragraph 4.e); and (ii)
establish and/or preserve
human, institutional, and/or social capital, including economic reintegration o f vulnerable groups
(paragraph 4.d). The use o f streamlined procedures allowed for under OPBP 8.00 has helped to
ensure timely processing o f the operation in direct support o f the immediate needs o f Government
which had sought a clear commitment from the Bank prior to the elections, and rapid start-up o f
project activities following elections. In light o f this, and given uncertainties around some o f the
activities which may impact the operation (particularly integration o f the Maoists in
cantonments), the OPBP’s emphasis on ex-post controls and more intensive supervision to
facilitate adjustments t o implementation realities as appropriate i s also particularly relevant. The
Bank considered other options such as general budgetary support, but the importance o f robust
fiduciary standards in use o f the funds suggested that a Rapid Response (RR) investment
operation (RR) was a more appropriate instrument. An additional important feature o f such
operations i s the flexibility allowed for under O P B P 8.00 t o adapt elements o f the project to an
evolving institutional and policy situation such as one sees in Nepal presently. N o existing or
well-developed pipeline projects easily lend themselves to restructuring or redesign given the size
and importance o f the cash transfer component proposed under this operation. The task team
anticipates that down-stream linkages with the ongoing Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF, a CDDtype operation) would be explored for medium-term support to populations and communities
affected by the conflict. The Government welcomes the involvement o f a third party financier in
terms o f providing assurance on the credibility o f payment and as a second channel for reviewing
the payment process to ensure transparency and that payments reach the intended beneficiaries.
Consistency with Country Strategy

19.
As noted above, the proposed operation i s consistent with the 2007 Nepal ISN, which
emphasizes both the need for ensuring sustained support for peace building efforts and also the
need to remain flexible to a fluid transitional environment in the country. Particular importance i s
attached to rapid response t o help reinforce the nascent peace in order t o capitalize on Nepal’s
window for laying the ground for sustained peace and development. The I S N clearly notes the
importance o f short term support and confidence building measures to increase the chances o f
Nepal progressing to a steady and sustained transition scenario. M o r e specifically, the I S N
anticipates the possibility o f providing financial support for immediate needs during the peace
process, including immediate relief to victims o f the conflict, in order to avoid crowding out o f
much needed development spending.

11

The 23 Point Agreement foresees the formation o f a set o f high level bodies which would help carry the
peace process forward. Apart from the Peace Commission, these include the Commission for the
Investigation o f the Disappeared, Truth and Reconciliation Commission, State Restructuring Commission,
Study and Recommendation Commission for Scientific Land Reform, and the High Level Committee for
Monitoring the Effective Implementation o f the CPA and Other Agreements. See Text o f 23PA, dated
December 23, 2007.

8

Expected Outcomes and Indicators

20.
Project outcomes: The following outcomes are anticipated from the project: (i)
improved compliance with the 23PA as a result o f timely delivery o f cash payments to people
affected by the conflict, including families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict (including
improved trust between parties to the 23
widows and orphans) and Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
increased transparency in the payments process with respect to payments
Point Agreement; (iii)
due to people affected by the conflict, including families o f deceased, disabled people, widows
and orphans and Maoists in cantonments; (iv) development o f a medium term strategy for
reintegration o f conflict-affected populations; and (v) robustly designed and piloted interventions
to support reintegration o f conflict-affected populations into economic activity.
21.
Outcome Indicators: The following indicators would be used t o monitor the
achievement o f the above outcomes: (i)
proportion o f eligible Maoists in cantonments and
regular and
families o f deceased receiving timely due payments on an individual basis; (ii)
effective coordination between the Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction and other relevant
acceptable audit reports on payments and
agencies at the central and district levels; (iii)
compliance with agreed payment procedures; (iv) medium term strategy for economic
reintegration o f selected conflict-affected populations; and (v) inclusion o f selected conflictaffected populations in programs providing support for reintegration. See Annex 2 (Results and
Monitoring Framework) for more details.

D.

Appraisal o f Project Activities

Economic Aspects: The overarching economic justification for the operation i s that it
22.
will contribute t o confidence building in the peace process, contributing in turn to an environment
which i s more conducive to the economic development o f Nepal. At the same time, it i s
important to recognize that many other factors will feed into the attainment o f sustainable peace
and development. Thus, while a suitable accommodation with Maoists and other conflictaffected groups i s a necessary condition o f peace building, it i s not sufficient. However, by
explicitly involving the Bank as an actor supporting the peace process, it i s hoped that the
operation will also give the institution a more complete scope o f involvement in Nepal’s
development. More specifically, the TA and capacity building in support o f peace building and
reconstruction should contribute over time to a policy and institutional environment which
promotes social and economic reintegration o f conflict-affected groups, increasing initially their
ability to support themselves and in time contribute more actively to economic activity in the
country.
Institutional Issues: A key institutional issue relevant to the design and effective
23.
implementation o f the project i s the political inclusiveness o f institutions which will be
responsible for moving the peace process forward. The political representativeness o f these
institutions will have a direct impact on the acceptability o f the project to different actors. The
Peace Commission (PC) i s anticipated by the 23PA as a key high level and politically inclusive
body to guide the peace process. Terms o f reference (TORS) for the PC were endorsed by the
Council o f Ministers in March 2008. I t i s expected that the PC will be formally established after
elections, though the precise timing remains unclear at this point. Pending formation o f the PC,
the Bank, GON and development partners have discussed a multi-party mechanism for providing
oversight and guidance t o the project and peace process activities more broadly. Such a multiparty mechanism i s considered crucial by all actors in promoting buy-in by different political
players to activities in support o f the peace process, including the project. It i s also considered

9

important that such a politically inclusive oversight and policy body for the project be the same as
that relied on by other development partners supporting the peace process in order to promote
harmonization. Pending future developments, it has been agreed that the Steering Committee for
the NPTF, which involves multi-party representation would be the oversight body for the
operation. This arrangement would be discussed with the new Government in the nearest future,
and there may be subsequent options agreed by the new Government, the Bank and development
partners. Whatever the decision on the eventual oversight and policy body beyond the NPTF SC,
GON, development partners and the Bank would continue t o coordinate closely t o ensure that the
multi-party oversight mechanism for the project i s one that has support o f all actors and promotes
close coordination o f effort and harmonization between the efforts o f Government and donors.
After the interim period, establishing and operationalizing an institutional relationship that has the
PC as the key policy and oversight body in the peace process with the Ministry as in effect i t s
executing secretariat i s one possible model. The flexibility allowed for under OPBP 8.00 will be
useful to allow the oversight arrangements for the project t o respond t o the evolving scenario in
the coming weeks and months. In addition to the planned national level Peace Commission,
district level Local Peace Committees (LPCs), with representation from the administration, local
political parties, and civil society, have been or are expected t o be constituted to take the peace
process to the grassroots level. Up till April 2008, 24 such LPCs had been established (out o f a
required total o f 75 - one per district), though their full effectiveness will require both
establishment o f the Peace Commission and capacity building.
24.
A second institutional issue relevant to project implementation i s the linkages to the
NPTF, formed in 2007. The N P T F was until recently an off-budget fund for the donor portion,
though donors have recently discussed with GON modalities to bring it on budget. The
implications o f this move for FM procedures and funds f l o w are in the process o f being defined.
K e y development partners have expressed a desire for the Bank under this project to ensure close
coordination with the NPTF and maximum harmonization with the NPTF activities and
institutional arrangements. Consistent with the Paris Principles o f Aid Effectiveness, the Bank,
GON and development partners agree that harmonized and coordinated approach i s desirable and
have been exploring how to operationalize such a relationship while also ensuring compliance
with the Bank’s fiduciary requirements.
25.
Harmonization o f the project and NPTF activities involves several aspects, including
harmonization o f strategic planning, o f the financial management and implementation
mechanisms, o f reporting, recording and monitoring and o f institutional arrangements. The Bank
has had intensive initial discussions with GON and NPTF development partners on how
harmonization can be promoted, and there appears to be agreement on modalities. Firstly, mutual
sharing o f information and plans o f the Bank and other development partners will be deepened
through the NPTF mechanism in order to ensure complementarity o f peace support efforts. This
will be particularly important for the project TA and reintegration support activities, where early
and sustained discussion o f strategic priorities for donor support i s essential to avoid duplication
o f effort. In order to ensure this, it i s proposed that the Project Management Team share TOR for
consultancy assignments over an agreed threshold with the Technical Committee o f the NPTF
and seek i t s comments and suggestions prior to procurement o f the consultancy services.
Harmonizing reporting o f project and NPTF activities would also be desirable, and it i s proposed
to have the project’s financial and performance reports included in the four monthly technical and
financial reporting o f NPTF. With respect to financial management and funds flow mechanisms,
when the NPTF comes o n budget, and assuming that the revised NPTF procedures are fully
compliant with regular GON budgetary systems, the GON, development partners and the Bank
would aim t o align the fund f l o w system in the coming Nepali fiscal year for project-financed
activities under Component 2 B (for reintegration support) and Component 3 (for capacity

10

building). There would in any event remain earmarking of Bank funding (as allowed for under
NPTF procedures), given that some eligible activities o f the NPTF, e.g., related to security force
reform, are not eligible for Bank financing. With respect to the cash payment support under
Component 1 and 2A, these would be subject to the agreed guidelines and procedures which
would ensure maximum transparency and accountability, ensuring that all payments go to the
intended individual beneficiaries.

26.
On the narrower issue of project implementation arrangements, it has been agreed with
GON that the Project Management Team be located in the MOPR, with regular staff from
relevant departments, including the cantonment management unit which sits in MOPR but reports
to MOF. The PMT would thus be integrated into regular governmental operations, in contrast to
a traditional PCU. An important issue for discussion i s putting in place reporting arrangements
from the PMT to both the Ministry and the PC - or the interim multi-party oversight mechanism
pending establishment of the PC - which ensure that oversight o f project implementationi s done
in a politically inclusive manner. The vehicle for oversight beyond MOPR, pending the
establishment o f the PC, would be the Steering Committee o f NPTF or such subsequent
politically inclusive oversight and policy making body as agreed with the new Government. At
the technical level, the PMT would coordinate with the Technical Committee o f the NPTF as
noted above in order to ensure that project-financed activities for reintegration and capacity
building benefit from the Technical Committee’s expertise and to promote coherence o f technical
support under the project, from GON and from development partners.
27.
Lessons o f Experience: The project has benefited from lessons learned on similar
operations in post-conflict settings focusing on supporting peace processes and prepared under
OPA3P8.00 procedures. The team drew on Bank-wide expertise and included a member who has
worked extensively on similar operations in African post-conflict settings. Some of the lessons
reflected in design include: (i)keeping project design relatively simple and focused on
application of fiduciary
interventions where national capacity i s felt to be adequate; and (ii)
arrangements, particularly with respect to FM, which reflect lessons of the Nepal portfolio and
similar cash payment operations in other countries. This includes reliance on a dedicated budget
line item for fund transfer, a robust beneficiary identification process; and a planned payment
process which involves both Government and Maoist input and oversight. Other lessons drawn
upon from similar operations include ensuring high-level policy guidance for project activities including seeking harmonizationof donor approaches to support for the peace process - allowing
sufficient flexibility in project design to adapt to changes in policy and implementation
environment, and relying on existing systems and institutions to ensure reasonably rapid
execution. Finally, despite the short-term focus of the project, the project team has also included
interventions with a longer term benefit in order to help sustain some of the impacts.
28.
Safeguards and Environmental Issues: The proposed environmental category for the
project i s “C”, reflecting the nature o f proposed interventions (cash payments; provision o f
consultancy services and training; office equipment), which are not expected to have adverse
environmental impacts. N o safeguards policies are triggered, as summarized in the ISDS which
has been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards team.
29.
The project has been prepared in line with OP/BP 8.00 and does not involve any
exceptions to Bank policies.

11

E. Implementation Arrangements and FinancingPlan

30.
Institutional Arrangements for Project Implementation:
The institutional
arrangements for project implementation would be as follows. At the highest level, it i s expected
that the PC - once formally established - would act as a high-level oversight and policy-making
institution on project activities as part o f i t s broader functions in overseeing the peace process.
Pending PC establishment, an interim oversight mechanism under the Steering Committee o f the
NPTF would be used, subject to any further agreement with GON and development partners on
an alternative politically inclusive oversight mechanism (see above). Beneath this, the M O P R
would be the primary implementing agency for the project, with the PMT located in the Ministry
under the overall supervision o f the Commission and the interim oversight mechanism pending i t s
formation. The M O P R has formed a Project Management Team (PMT) headed by the Project
Coordinator (Joint Secretary o f the Conflict Management Division) and comprised o f
representatives from other Divisions/Sections - Conflict Analysis and Policy Formulation
Division, Relief and Rehabilitation Section, Planning and Monitoring Section and Cantonment
Management Division. The Team will include a dedicated Accounts Officer and a part-time
Procurement Officer who will pull resources/consultants when required from the system when
specific procurement support i s required. For Component 1, the PMT will deliver cash benefits
through the Cantonment Management Section which has Cantonment Officers in each o f the
main cantonment siteddistricts. For cash payments under Component 2, the P M T will work
through the 75 Chief District Officers (CDOs) which are heading the authorized district offices
that maintain records o f families o f people killed as a result o f the conflict.
3 1.
The proposed operation will use the normal government procedures followed by a normal
budget line item, with such additional checks and balances as agreed under the payment
guidelines for payments t o individual Maoists in cantonments and families o f those killed as a
result o f the conflict. The budgeting procedures for preparation, approval, implementation, and
monitoring are elaborated in the Financial Procedures Regulations (FPR). The annual work
program and budget will be based on the work program to be prepared by the MOPR. Annual
work programs and budgets are submitted to the National Planning Commission (NPC) and the
Ministry o f Finance (MOF) for discussion.
32.
MOF will release authorizations for expenditure to MOPR. The Secretary o f M O P R will
issue authorization to the Secretary o f the Office o f Central Coordination for Cantonment
Management (OCCCM) for Component 1 and to the Project Coordinator for Components 2 and 3
for disbursement o f funds. The Secretary o f O C C C M will issue spending authorizations to the
Cantonment Officers located in seven districts (Jhapa, Sindhuli, Chitwan, Nawalparasi, Rolpa,
Surkhet and Kailali) and copy such authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the Financial
Comptroller General and the District Treasury Controller o f seven districts. Fund release to the
Cantonment Offices will then take place through a normal release procedure through respective
District Treasury Controller Offices (DTCOs). The Secretary o f OCCCM will eventually be held
accountable for disbursements o f funds under Component 1. Similarly, for Component 2A, the
Project Coordinator would issue spending authorizations to the Chief District Officers (CDOs) o f
75 districts and copy such authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the Financial Comptroller
General and the District Treasurer Controller o f 75 districts. Fund release t o the CDOs will take
place through a normal release procedure through respective DTCOs. The Project Coordinator
and CDOs are held accountable for expenses under Component 2.

33.
Once the funds are released to the Cantonment Officers in the seven districts through the
respective DTCOs for Component 1 (payments to individual Maoists in cantonments), a
modification in the current system i s warranted in order to ensure that cash transfers take place to

12

the intended beneficiaries. Transactions would be made only through checks in the name of
individual beneficiaries as per the approved l i s t of eligible Maoists in cantonments by using the
services of banks with a network in the cantonment locations. Checks would not be transferred
unless a GON representative from the cantonment management office and Maoist representative
certify the eligibility o f payments as per the agreed norms. I t would also be required that an
independent third party witness the payment process, and arrangement be made to that effect with
the involvement o f the Maoists and GON which i s also acceptable to IDA. Such an arrangement
would need to elaborate the scope o f the third party's role in "witnessing the payments" which
ensures a standard process for the role of the third party witness. Documents based on which
checks would be issued are the approved Attendance Roster, vouchers generated for payments to
each individual and checks prepared based on such approved vouchers. Where feasible,
beneficiaries will be encouraged to open individual savings accounts so that payments can be
made directly to their savings accounts. GON has entered into dialogue with the government
owned banks to facilitate the process. Arrangements will be made for mobile banks to provide
services in a specified date in each cantonment. Maoists in cantonments would encash their
checks through mobile banking. Banks will check the identity o f each individual, verify the
check, and obtain receipts o f checks and payments from each individual. For Component 2A
(payments to families o f deceased people), the Chief District Officer (CDO) will be accountable
to verify and attest the receipt o f payments made to the identified beneficiaries. One-off cash
transfers in this case will also be made through banking arrangements through checks, preferably,
in the individual savings accounts if not, through demand checks.
As mandated by the Interim Constitution of Nepal, Project Audits would be carried out
34.
by the Supreme Audit Institution, the Office o f the Auditor General.
35.
Project costs and financing plan: Total project costs are estimated at US$50 million.
The breakdown o f by expenditure category would be as outlined in the table below.

Expenditure category

Estimated US$ Allocation

Goods

200,000

Cash Payments

40,800,000

Consulting services, Training

2,800,000

Reintegration Support

5,000,000

Incremental Operating Costs

1,200,000
50,000,000

Total

37.
Disbursement arrangements: Disbursements from IDA will be made in accordance
with traditional disbursement procedures, including full documentation for contracts above the

13

Prior Review threshold or Statements o f Expenditures (SOEs). T o facilitate disbursements, a
Designated Account in Nepali Rupees will be established. For all payments, including cash
transfers, GON will pre-fund the activities, and disbursements from IDA will be made via
replenishments o f the Designated Account. For payments in foreign currency under Component
3, if any, would be made through request for direct payments by IDA t o the concerned party.
38.
Retroactive Financing: T o facilitate speedy support t o Maoists in cantonments prior to
project effectiveness, the Project would allow retroactive financing in the amount o f US$20
million (up to 40 percent o f the IDA grant amount) for benefit transfers that occurred after July
2007 and have followed the disbursement/FM procedures agreed under this project to ensure
eligibility o f expenditures.

39.
Use of Statement o f Expenditures (SOEs): SOEs will be used for the following
expenditures: (i) cash transfers under components 1 and 2; (ii) training, workshop and study
all
all
tours; and (iv) all incremental operating costs; (v) contracts for equipment and vehicles, costing
less than US$lOO,OOO equivalent per contract; (vi) contracts for services o f consulting f i r m s
costing less than US$50,000 equivalent per contract; and (vii) contracts for services o f individual
consultants costing less than US$25,000 equivalent per contract. During the initial IDA
supervision, the mission will closely review the SOE claims to ensure that the funds are utilized
for the intended purposes. Any ineligible expenditure identified during this and subsequent
reviews will need t o be refunded to IDA.
40.
Designated Accounts: A separate Designated Account in Nepali Rupees will be
established, on terms and conditions satisfactory to IDA. The authorized allocations for the
Designated Account under the Grant will be NRs. 300,000,000. For the utilization o f IDA’S
share o f project expenditures, the PMT in MOPR may open and maintain the Designated
Accounts in Nepali Rupees at the Nepal Rastra Bank under terms and conditions acceptable to
IDA. The Designated Accounts will be managed under the joint signatures o f the Project
Coordinator and the Accounts Officer.

41.
Procurement: The P M T Project Coordinator has good experience and training in
procurement. An additional procurement resource person will be pulled in o n consultancy or on
deputation terms as and when the procurement function requires substantial inputs. In general,
however, the project activities are not expected to involve complex procurement, i.e. the bulk o f
project financing i s for cash transfers, which are not subject t o procurement considerations.
There i s no civil works procurement under this Project. For the anticipated goods, training and
consultancy services anticipated, the packages are not expected t o exceed the relevant
procurement thresholds which would require more complex procurement methods. The limited
goods purchased would be done according to national shopping procedures, as the goods are
expected to be readily available o f f the shelf or standard specification commodities. Request for
Quotation documents will be satisfactory to and agreed with the Bank. Non-consulting services
under the project will include delivery o f seminars and selected training shall be obtained from
local service providers through request for proposals using a lump sum format o f contract or
shopping. Consultancy services will be procured according t o national shopping procedures in
cases where f i r m s are required t o provide the service, and according to Section V o f the
Consultant Guidelines for selection o f individual consultants. Short l i s t s o f consultants for
services estimated to cost less than US$ 200,000 equivalent per contract may be composed
entirely o f national consultants in accordance with the provisions o f paragraph 2.7 o f the
Consultant Guidelines. Further details on procurement thresholds for different activities and
review procedures are outlined in Annex 5.

14

42.
Arrangements for Bank supervision, monitoring, and evaluation: Bank supervision
would be done on a continuous basis out o f the Bank’s Nepal Country Office, where the co-task
team leader (TTL), FM specialist and operations analyst (a consultant) are located. In addition,
formal regular supervision missions would be conducted initially o n a quarterly basis and
subsequently as needed (but n o less than twice a year). The other co-TTL and procurement staff
are located in the Bank’s N e w Delhi office and are thus accessible for both regular and formal
supervision as required. An ex-post review o f cash transfers will also be carried out by using the
qualified consulting firm. Through the capacity building component, studies will also be
undertaken o f the cash payment process in order to assess the robustness and propose
modifications as needed.
43.
Given the very short preparation period o f the project, supervision demands in the initial
6-12 months o f project implementation can be expected to be intensive. This i s typical o f OP
8.00 operations where quality assurance i s unusually dependent o n supervision ex post, and
where the inherent uncertainty o f the situation requires close supervision t o allow the project to
respond to an evolving situation. In addition, the need to elaborate the packages o f reintegration
support interventions for different conflict-affected populations will require close involvement o f
team members as well as close coordination with the other development partners providing
assistance to the peace process. This will therefore need to be taken this account in allocation o f
supervision budget for the project, especially for the forthcoming fiscal year.

With respect to evaluation, there would be periodic monitoring o f performance based on
44.
the agreed performance indicators outlined in Annex 2, and TA funds are proposed to be
allocated for conducting studies during project life to assess the situation o f different conflictaffected groups. This would include household and local area surveys, qualitative studies on
perceptions o f reintegration among different groups, and other methods to be agreed in the initial
months o f project implementation.
Illustrative implementation schedule. The proposed closing date for the project i s June
45.
30, 201 1. The estimated implementation schedule i s as follows: (i)
Board approval, late-April,
2008; (ii)
Project Effectiveness, June 2008 (iii)
Initial formal supervision mission, June 2008; and
(iv) Project Closing in June 201 1. Given the likely scheduling o f cash payments, it i s expected
that the large majority o f disbursements would take place in the first 6-12 months o f project life.

F.

Project Risks and Mitigating Measures

46.
The project has a number o f risks that could undermine the achievement o f i t s
development objectives (DOs). Overall, and inherent in the post-conflict situation, the risks o f
the project not achieving i t s objectives fully or sustainably are high. Even with the proposed
mitigation measures, the residual risks remain significant in some cases, and the project can
therefore be considered a “high risk, high reward” operation. Even if the project i s well
implemented and project-specific risks are well managed, broader political and social risks could
undermine achievement o f the objectives and can not be fully mitigated within the project itself.
The key risks and proposed mitigating measures are outlined below:

15

Risk

Mitigating measures

Political risks
* Breakdown in the.democratic transition process
and key players cease to abide by the 23PA

Larger risk which the project can not properly
mitigate, but project support for meeting
financial commitments o f peace process acts as
confidence building measure

Implementation risks
Cash benefits are not paid i a manner
n
consistent with required fiduciary, particularly
FM, procedures

Well-defined fiduciaryFM arrangements, with
third party involvement in payment process and
intensive monitoring by IDA
Agree cut-off date with GON for I D A financing
o f payments and on budgetary procedures for
financing allowance payments beyond project
allocation.
Composition o f PC i s sufficiently representative
with high-level membership. TA for capacity
strengthening o f PC and MOPR. Disbursements
linked to effective PC oversight.

Uncertainty on future period of residence in
cantonments results i unclear exit strategy for
n
Bank in financing allowances
PC or other multi-party oversight body unable
to exercise effective cross-party oversight o f
project and other peace support expenditures

TA to deepen engagement with GON on
developing options for successful reintegration
o f different groups. On Maoists in cantonments,
continuation o f GON Committee on security
force reform with support o f other UN agencies
and bilaterals.

Uncertainty on reintegration options for
conflict-affected target groups undermines
sustainability o f beneficiary transitions

Reput at ional risks
Bank viewed as not being politically evenhanded under project in balancing support to
various specific conflict-affected groups

Providing support to both Maoist and nonMaoist victims o f the conflict as well as
providing institutional support to GON.
Engagement with multi-party PC or equivalent
interim body to ensure ongoing buy-in across the
political spectrum
Regular monitoring o f project implementation
and use o f individual check payments. Periodic
monitoring surveys and other assessment tools.

Cash benefits partly accrue to Maoists and
Bank i s viewed as providing support to Maoist
party instead o f to individual Maoists in
cantonments

G.

Terms and Conditions for Project Financing

47.

The Project will be financed entirely through IDA grant, as have been a l l recent projects
approved for Nepal. Financing o f project costs would be done o n a 100 percent basis.

48.
Prior to disbursement, it would be essential to have three actions finalized, which are
essential to ensuring that the payments made under Components 1 and 2 (1) are delivered in a
manner which satisfies fiduciary standards and reflects a political and institutional commitment
among the respective actors to robust payment processes f o r both Maoists in cantonments and
families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict. In addition, the guidelines for reintegration
support will need t o be elaborated in the initial months o f the Project in order to proceed with

16

interventions under that sub-component. The Conditions o f Disbursement for the respective
components are therefore as follows:
Benefit Payment Operational Guidelines satisfactory to IDA have
under Component 1: (i)
GON has executed a memorandum o f understanding with each o f
been prepared; and (ii)
the Rastriya Banijya Bank, the Nepal Bank Limited, and the Nepal Rastra Bank, as
applicable, setting forth implementation and internal control arrangements for Benefit
payments under Part 1 o f the Project satisfactory to the Association.
under Component (2)(a): MOF and MOPR have agreed on Guidelines for the Process o f
Family Benefit Payments to eligible families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict, in
form and substance satisfactory to IDA.
under Category (2)(b): (i) Reintegration Support Operational Guidelines satisfactory
the
to the Association have been prepared; and (ii) Peace Commission, or any other
the
alternative mechanism acceptable to IDA, has endorsed the information provided by
M O P R on cash payments to Maoists in cantonments and families o f deceased.
There are also proposed to be several covenants, as follows:
The Recipient shall ensure that: (i)
Component 2, sub-component 2 o f the Project i s
implemented in accordance with the provisions o f the Operational Guidelines for
no
reintegration support t o be developed; and (ii) action i s taken which would prevent or
interfere with such implementation.
The Recipient shall ensure that the identification and verification o f Beneficiaries under
Components 1 and 2 o f the Project and the transfers o f transitional safety net payments to
such Beneficiaries shall be made in accordance with the principles, criteria and
procedures satisfactory t o the Association.
The Recipient shall, by April 10, 2008 complete the staffing of, and thereafter maintain
the Project Management Team (PMT) with functions and key professionals with skills,
qualifications, experience and terms o f reference satisfactory to the Association.
There are also several FM-specific covenants, as follows:
submission o f annual audited project financial statements;
submission o f I P R each trimester; and
annual work program and budget for each component would be shared with IDA.

17

Annex 1: Detailed Description o f Project Components
N e p a l Emergency Peace Support Project

1.
As highlighted in the main text o f the EPP, the project would consist o f three main
components: (i)
transitional safety-net allowance payments to Maoists in cantonments during a
transitional period, (ii)
cash benefits to the families o f those killed during the conflict and
reintegration support for other conflict-affected populations, and (iii)
capacity building o f key
institutional structures in support o f the peace and project management support. These
components are described below.
2.
Component I: Transitional safety net payments to Maoists in cantonments during the
transition period. Over 19,000 eligible Maoists have been placed in seven cantonments
following the Peace Agreement, with commitment by political parties t o payment o f regular
allowances to reduce the chances o f disenchantment and t o mitigate against a need for rentseeking behavior while the Maoists are encamped. These act in effect as transitional safety net
payments. However, eight months o f payments were outstanding as o f mid-February 2008, and
there are presently n o funds budgeted for forward payments that will be necessary for the months
following elections. This component would finance transitional safety net payments for 19,602
Maoists in cantonments. The eligible Maoists were registered and verified by a two stage process
involving the two parties to the conflict and UNMIN, which conducted a detailed verification o f
each potential beneficiary and issued individual bar-coded identity cards t o those verified. The
verification and registration process i s considered to have followed good international practice by
Bank and UN staff familiar with similar operations in other countries.

3.
The component would cover both payment arrears from July 2007 and forward payments
for the period to mid-January 2009 for those registered through this process.12 The benefits
would be paid out to the individual beneficiaries in the form o f individual checks for the initial
payments, with an effort to move t o bank account deposits as the payment modality before the
end o f the project-financed period o f b e n e f i t ~ . ' ~ The payment process would involve
administrative officials, Maoists representatives and an agreed independent third party to witness
the payment process. Payments would be made according to an agreed set o f guidelines, which
are intended to ensure transparency in the process, and compliance with the guidelines would be a
condition o f disbursement o f project funds for payments. Project financing would be provided on
a reimbursement basis, providing an additional check on compliance with the agreed procedures.
Details o f the funds flow arrangements and institutional roles are provided in the FM annex and
Section E o f the main EPP o n Implementation Arrangements. The payments would be made in a
single payment for arrears and then on a regular periodic basis for the forward payments. There
would also be financing under Component 3 for a communications campaign to inform
beneficiaries o f their entitlements and the payment process, as w e l l as surveys o f beneficiaries
after payments begin to be made (though such surveys will need to be negotiated with the Maoists
leadership in order to ensure that they provide useful insights into the payment process).
Effective communications to beneficiaries, particularly in settings like cantonments, has been
The breakdown o f the 19,602 is: (i)
18,789 f i l l y verified Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
153 Maoists
eligible but not in cantonment as providing VIP security services; and (iii) Maoists in cantonments
660
from Phase I1 verification also awaiting final decisions but eligible. For the latter two groups arrears are
owed from November 2006.
l3 The payment method contrasts with the one round o f payments made in 2007, where a lump sum
payment was made to the Maoist camp commander for subsequent distribution to those in the cantonment.

18

shown in other parts of the world to be critical in terms of managing expectations and increasing
the transparency of payment processes. Finally, there would need to be agreement on a grievance
process for beneficiaries in the event of irregularities in the payment procedure and this would be
reflected in the payment guidelines. While the ultimate period o f future residence in cantonments
i s not known at this point, a cut-off date has been agreed with GON which balances estimates o f
future need with the need for an exit strategy for the Bank. Benefit payments beyond January
2009 would be expected to be picked up within the budget through a proposal o f supplementary
budget if required. I n addition to the financing o f transitional safety net payments, there would be
provision for incremental operating costs associated with delivery o f benefits in a manner
consistent with the Bank and GON’s fiduciary standards (e.g., logistical costs of physical delivery
o f payments). Assuming payment o f arrears and an additional nine months o f payments, postelections, the estimated value o f this component i s US$18.55 million, of which US$550,000
would be for incremental operating costs.

4.
Component2: Benefits to families o those killed as a result o the conflict and
f
f
reintegration support to other conflict-affected populations. This component would have two
sub-components:
5.
Sub-component 1: The sub-component would finance benefit payments to survivor
families o people killed as a result o the conflict. Therefore, this component would provide
f
f
compensation payments to 14,000 plus families in the amount of NRs. 100,000 (US$1570) per
person killed as per GON decision in March 2008. This would be paid as a lump-sum benefit,
though payment would be spread over several months to achieve national coverage. These
families were identified through a process conducted under the leadership of Chief District
Officers (CDOs), with input from several sources to verify eligible families and with close review
by higher levels o f administration and Government. These lists have therefore been officially
endorsed and are maintained at the district level for families resident in each district. This
process i s therefore considered to have done a reliable job of identification by national and
international observers, including identifying the eligible individual in the families o f those killed
who would be entitled to receive the payment.14 Given the significant lump sum amount o f the
benefit, payments would be required to be made into bank accounts of individual beneficiaries in
order to reduce risks. There would also be a set o f guidelines agreed for the payment process
which would be required to be followed as a condition of disbursement of project funds for
payments. This would include a role for local third parties who could advise beneficiaries in
order to reduce the prospects o f both predatory behavior by others and ill-informed decisions by
beneficiaries (though ultimately it would remain the prerogative o f individual beneficiaries how
to use their benefit payments). As with first component, there would be provision for incremental
operating costs associated with delivery o f benefits in a manner consistent with the Bank and
GON’s fiduciary standards. There would also be linked support under Component 3 for a
communications campaign to beneficiaries, special reviews of the payment process and
beneficiary surveys which would be implemented from early in the process to gain insights into
the effectiveness of the payment procedures and adjust them as necessary for other districts where
payments are made later. There would also need to be a grievance process agreed as part of the
payment guidelines. Given that the payment schedule across 75 districts i s expected to take place
over several months, it i s hoped that the lessons from districts where payments are made first will
be useful. The estimated size o f the payments and recurrent cost support under the first sub14

Confidence in the official number o f families with a member killed as a result o f the conflict i s bolstered
by the fact that a national NGO (INSEC) conducted detailed information collection throughout the conflict
on those killed through a network o f local investigators. Their figures on the number o f people killed as a
result o f the conflict and their composition are remarkably close to the official numbers.

19

component i s US$23.23 million, o f which around US$455,000 would be for incremental
operating costs.

6.
Sub-component 2: The sub-component would provide support for reintegration
assistance to other conflict-affected groups (e.g., people disabled in the conflict; internally
displaced people (IDPs); families o f persons who have disappeared; minors involved in the
conflict; orphaned children; widows). This could take a variety o f forms (e.g., training; legal and
counseling services; rehabilitation services for disabled people; piloting o f interventions) and
would be elaborated by GON with the assistance o f technical assistance (TA) provided under the
third component and in close consultation with other development partners through the
mechanism o f the Nepal Peace Trust Fund. Given the uncertainty o n the specific reintegration
assistance and i t s scale, the team proposes that a dedicated pool be provided in the project to
finance reintegration support for selected conflict-affected groups. This would be more
specifically defined and programmed during the first year o f project implementation, including
through pilot activities, and closely coordinated to maximize complementarity with the activities
o f GON and the development partners. In order to promote close coordination with other donors,
proposals for activities under this sub-component would be shared with the Technical Committee
o f the NPTF (or such other body as mutually agreed with GON, development partners and the
Bank). This would be consolidated into operational guidelines for accessing these funds which
would be a condition o f disbursement for the sub-component, an approach used previously in
Nepal under the Economic Reform Technical Assistance (ERTA) Project. It i s not expected that
the funds proposed would be sufficient to cover the likely overall reintegration support needs o f
these groups. However, as the policy framework i s elaborated by GON, additional resources
could be made available through either reallocation o f existing funds or seeking supplemental
financing as appropriate. The proposed amount for reintegration support interventions would be
US$ 5 million.
7.
Component 3: Capacity building o key institutional structures in support o the peace
f
f
process and project management support. Given the relatively short project implementation
period and nature o f interventions, this component i s estimated to cost US$3.22 million. This
component would have three sub-components:
8.
Sub-component 1: Capacity building and technical assistance for the Ministry o
f
Peace and Reconstruction to perform their corefunctions more effectively. This would include
as an immediate priority i t s oversight role on payments to families o f deceased and Maoists in
cantonments (e.g., strengthening the M I S system, internal procedures, communications
campaigns for beneficiaries o f project-financed payments, and monitoringheporting, including
beneficiary surveys), and programs for other conflict-affected groups such as orphans, widows,
and disabled people. In addition, it would include technical assistance and capacity building for
performance o f the Ministry’s roles in supporting the peace process support, within an overall
vision o f the Ministry as a coordinator rather than executor. This would include training, legal
advisory support for i t s secretariat functions in drafting new policies and procedural guidelines,
advisory services on development o f GON’s overall reintegration strategy and specific
reintegration interventions programs, and capacity for information education campaigns (IEC)
which are considered a critical element in building awareness and confidence in the overall peace
process. The component would promote exposure to best international practices in reintegration,
reconciliation and rehabilitation, devising appropriate mechanisms for integrating peace and
developmental activities, reorienting sectoral ministries towards conflict-sensitive design o f
development projects, and supporting effective functioning o f the peace focal points in each
ministry. The technical assistance under this component would inform design o f the reintegration
support activities for various groups to be financed under Component 2. I t will be critical to

20

ensure that more specific definition o f TA support i s done in close coordination with other
development partners, several o f which have or plan for ongoing support for peace and
reintegration activities. The proposed vehicle for ensuring such harmonization o f approach i s the
NPTF .

9.
Sub-component 2: Support for core project implementation tasks o the Project
f
Management Team (PMT) such as procurement, financial management (FM), including
evaluation o f project interventions through surveys and other assessment tools. The PMT would
be located in the MOPR, with staff from relevant departments, including the cantonment
management unit which sits in M O P R but reports to MOF. The PMT would also have a key role
in ensuring that the agreed guidelines for payments to Maoists and cantonments and families to
those killed as a result o f the conflict were followed, including channeling financial support for
incremental operating costs associated with delivery o f the payments.

10.
Sub-component 3:
Training, workshops and technical assistance for other actors in
the peace process as needed, including the Peace Commission once formed, the Peace and
Conflict Management Committee if required, Local Peace Committees, and other groups such as
parliamentarians and possibly other bodies related to the peace process envisaged in the 23PA.l’
The priorities for use o f the funds under this sub-component would be determined in light o f
GON’s priorities for support t o the peace process and in close consultation with the technical
Committee o f the NPTF or such other politically inclusive mechanism as agreed with GON and
other development partners.

’’

The 23 Point Agreement foresees the formation o f a set o f high level bodies which would help carry the
peace process forward. Apart from the Peace Commission, these include the Commission for the
Investigation o f the Disappeared, Truth and Reconciliation Commission, State Restructuring Commission,
Study and Recommendation Commission for Scientific Land Reform, and the High Level Committee for
Monitoring the Effective Implementation o f the CPA and Other Agreements. See Text o f 23PA, dated
December 23,2007.

21

%
C

.3

Y

:
a,

8

.3
Y

m

9

$
8
.3
C
0
.3
Y

m

a
.0

.-

5
a
e,

Y

id
.L

a

&

9-

ru
0

Y

e,
C

8
a
x

P

B

2

m

.

.

8

.e
Y

cd
3
0
.3

>

i$
m
s
c
d
a,
0

I=

.3

c

0
.c
0

f

2

8
a,

m

m

N
N

.

.

m
m

W

Q)

$
a
2

.

s

. ..

m

N

m

r

I

.

.

. .

. .

m

m

0

m

E

m

m

m

d
N

m

m

Q)

0

8

a

n

m

m

m

cr

0

.

a

m

m

m

m

m

m

m

0

0

Annex 3: Estimated Project Costs Breakdown
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project

Component

Estimated allocation (US$
Million)

1. Transitional safety net payments
to Maoists in cantonments during the transition period
(a) Cash payments
(b) Incremental recurrent costs
2. Cash benefits to families o f those killed as a result of
the conflict and reintegration support to other conflictaffected populations
(a) Cash payments to families
(b) Incremental recurrent costs
(c) Reintegration support interventions

I

18.0
0.55

I

22.8
0.45
5.0

I 3.

Capacity building o f key institutionalstructures in
support o f the peace process and project management
(a) Capacity building and technical assistance for the
Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction to perform their core
functions more effectively.
(b) Training and technical assistance for other actors in the
geace process
(c) Support for core project implementation tasks o f the
P M T including evaluation o f project interventions and

2.8

0.4

mods

I

I

27

Annex 4: Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project

Country Financial Management Environment

1.
The Nepal Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA) that was conducted
jointly by the Government o f Nepal (GON) and IDA in 2002 and subsequently updated in 2005,
concluded that the failure to comply with the impressive legal and regulatory fiduciary
framework makes the fiduciary risk in Nepal “High”, but the risk i s similar to that in most
developing countries. The situation has not significantly changed. The draft Public Financial
Management (PFM) Review (May 2007) have reaffirmed that the P F M system in Nepal i s well
designed but unevenly implemented. The Public Financial Accountability Assessment (PFAA)
issued in February 2008, has also reiterated that the fiduciary risk in Nepal continues to be
“High”. The GON, however, i s committed to improving the overall financial accountability
framework. This has been demonstrated by promulgating the Public Procurement A c t and Public
Procurement Regulations in 2007, amending the Financial Administration Regulations in 2007,
and also leading the self-assessment o f various P F M Indicators as per Public Expenditure
Financial Accountability (PEFA) Guidelines. Further work on P F M including setting up the
PFM benchmarks as per the PEFA Guidelines carried out in 2007, and subsequent
implementation o f actions that need to be agreed with GON will help to mitigate the inherent
country risk.
Background on the ImplementingAgency and Program

2.
The Ministry o f Peace and Reconstruction (MOPR) was established by GON in 2007 (by
the decision o f the Government o f Nepal, Allocation o f Business Rules, 2007, as published in the
Nepal Gazette on M a y 7, 2007) with the following key mandate: (i)
formulate, implement and
monitor the immediate and long-term policies, strategies, plans and programs for the
establishment o f peace, conflict management and reconstruction o f physical infrastructures
formulate policies, strategies and programs o f social and economic
damaged due to conflict; (ii)
monitor the implementation o f various peace
development o f conflict-affected regions; (iii)
agreements including the Comprehensive Peace Accord; and (iv) a ssume transitional
management o f the peace process and conflict-related reconstruction plans.
3.
The proposed emergency operation on Peace Support i s t o respond t o GON to contribute
to the consolidation o f the Nepal peace process to ultimately result in bringing a lasting
development impact. The overall objective o f the project i s t o contribute to the consolidation of
the Nepal peace process by supporting: (i)
Government to meet commitments to selected groups
affected by the conflict, including families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict, conflictrelated widows and orphans, disabled people, and individual Maoists in cantonments; (ii)
ensuring transparency in implementation o f benefits under the Project for the conflict-affected
strengthening o f key institutions which are
groups, including the Maoists in cantonments; and (ii)
tasked with policy and implementation functions in peace building, reintegration and
rehabilitation. The primary target group o f beneficiaries i s the estimated 19,602 eligible Maoists
in cantonments from Maoist who are currently placed in seven cantonments following the Peace
Agreement and the survivor families o f the estimated 14,344 deceased people who were killed
during the conflict. The proposed emergency operation will have three components: (a) cash
transfers to Maoists in cantonments during the transition period; (b) cash transfers (one time) to
families o f victims killed as a result o f the conflict and initial reintegration support to other

28

conflict-affected populations; and (c) capacity building for M O P R and key institutional structures
in support o f the peace process.
Adequacy of Financial Management Arrangements

4.
The project i s an emergency response t o GON’s request to support the consolidation o f
the Nepal peace process. There i s a high level commitment at the political level to ensure lasting
peace in Nepal. A clear indicator o f this i s the signing o f the 23 Peace Agreement (23PA) among
the top leaders o f the seven political parties toward implementation o f the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. In response t o this, the Council o f Ministers issued directives on December 24, 2007
to all ministries to ensure timely implementation o f the 23PA. The proposed emergency
operation i s a response to contribute towards implementation o f the comprehensive peace
agreement and sustainable peace and stability in the post conflict context o f Nepal. GON has
established strategic priorities for peace-related efforts, and the proposed operation i s targeting to
address some o f those priorities as explained above. In order to respond to two core areas o f cash
transfers to Maoists in cantonments and to the families o f persons killed as a result o f the conflict,
GON has already established an institutional mechanism for cash transfers coordinating closely
with UNMIN, the U body responsible for authenticating eligible Maoists in cantonments and
N
which has oversight in cantonment sites in seven districts. Similarly, GON has made a Cabinet
level decision (on October 8, 2007) regarding the norms o f rates t o be paid t o the Maoists in
cantonments, which form a basis for the cash transfers to the made t o them. Regarding the one
time cash transfers to the eligible families o f those killed as a result o f the conflict, G O N i s
relying on the record and certification o f the 7 5 CDOs who are the authorized district authorities
for maintaining such records. A Directive describing the norms for financial support to such
families was approved by the Cabinet in March 2008. For greater transparency and for ensuring
better controls on cash transfers, modification o f the current system i s warranted which i s
described in this assessment, which has been discussed and agreed with GON. This i s to ensure
that funds that are disbursed following the approved norms actually reach the intended
beneficiaries.

5.
The institutional arrangements to implement the various cash transfer schemes are
already in place. The M O P R has formed a PMT headed by the Project Coordinator (Joint
Secretary o f the Conflict Management Division) and comprised o f representatives from other
Divisions/Sections, including the Conflict Analysis and Policy Formulation Division, Relief and
Rehabilitation Section, Planning and Monitoring Section and Cantonment Management Division.
I t will include a dedicated Accounts Officer and a part-time Procurement Officer who will pull
resourceshonsultants when required from the system when specific procurement support i s
required. For Component 1, the PMT will work through the Cantonment Management Section
which has a Cantonment Officer in each o f the seven cantonment siteddistricts. UNMIN has
detailed information on each o f the Maoists in cantonments. For Component 2, the P M T will
work through the 7 5 CDOs which are heading the authenticated authorized district offices which
maintain records o f families o f people killed as a result o f the conflict. The Directives that are
currently under the Cabinet review will form the basis to implement the cash transfers under the
component. T o guide the MOPR and the PMT, the PC - or such interim politically inclusive
body as mutually agreed pending formation o f the PC - would act as a high level oversight
institution on project activities as part o f i t s broader function to oversee the peace process.
Overall, the FM arrangements for the project are adequate at this initial stage o f project
implementation with some modifications as will be described in this assessment. These will need
to be further improved in the areas indicated below to ensure a satisfactory FM system throughout
the project implementation.

29

Risk Analysis
6.
High-level priority to
From the FM perspective, the overall risk i s “substantial”.
implement the 23PA, facilitation by UNMIN in the peace process, commitment o f seven political
parties for sustained peace, and institutional arrangements that are in place are some o f the factors
that aim to mitigate the risks. Overall, the decision to integrate the funding o f this program
through the government’s financial management system will ensure adequate parliamentary
oversight and scrutiny by other oversight agencies. Special efforts will be taken by M O P R to
establish the monitoring system t o monitor the project activities. Arrangements will also be made
for ex-post review o f cash transfers made under Components 1 and 2 through the use o f
consultants. Further, there will be strong efforts to build capacity both in technical areas as well
as overall project management including procurement and FM. The capacity building component
would provide TA to MOPR to perform their core functions more effectively. Amongst others, it
would also support training programs for various groups involved in the peace process including
the PC, the LPC members and the targeted parliamentarians committees. T o address certain gaps
that have been identified during the assessment, risk mitigation action plans have been agreed,
and the risks will be reduced as the action plans get implemented. The creation o f the PC for
policy guidance and oversight o n implementation o f peace process i s an indication o f the priority
given to implementing this program.
Strengths

7.
The proposed operation has the following FM strengths: (i)
high-level government and
seven party commitment to implement the 23PA; (ii)
UNMIN facilitation o f the peace process;
(iii)
policy decisions o f the Cabinet on cash payments to Maoists in cantonments and norms for
cash payments to families o f people killed in the conflict; (iv) a strong P M T in MOPR under the
leadership o f the joint Secretary; (v) ensuring the program follows existing country systems to
make the process transparent with regard to the budget and the accompanying parliamentary
oversight; and (vi) capacity building component to strengthen the technical capacity o f M O P R
and peace-related efforts.
Weaknesses and Resolutions

8.
Deputation o f core staff in the P M T and their continuity throughout project
implementation i s important for the successful implementation. An emergency operation like this
one requires strong commitment and high level coordination both at the political and bureaucratic
levels. Strong donor coordination i s also key to helping ensure a successfully implemented peace
process. Developing the FM system and accountability framework in the MOPR i s also critical to
ensure better accountability over funds disbursed and making information accessible to public.
Integrating the Maoists in cantonments and families o f those killed in the conflict into the
country’s development framework i s an opportunity that should not be overlooked.
Planning and Budgeting

9.
The proposed operation will follow the same government procedure as used with any
normal budget line item. The budgeting procedures for preparation, approval, implementation,
and monitoring are elaborated in the Financial Procedure Regulations (FPR). The annual work
program and budget will be based on the work program to be prepared by MOPR. Annual work
programs and budgets are submitted to the National Planning Commission (NPC) and MOF for
discussion. The current fiscal year ‘Appropriation Book’ (Budget 2007/08) has three dedicated
budget line items through which the project’s activities can be implemented. The budget lines

30

are: 95-4-976 (Peace Trust Fund - including cantonment management) or budget lines: 95-3-95 1
and 95-4-95 1 (contingency). All activities under this project will be “on-budget”.

10.
MOF will release authorizations for expenditure to MOPR. The Secretary o f M O P R will
issue authorization to the Secretary o f the Office o f Central Coordination for Cantonment
Management (OCCCM) for Component 1 and to the Project Coordinator for Components 2 and 3
for disbursement o f funds. The Secretary o f O C C C M will issue spending authorizations to the
Cantonment Officers located in seven districts (Jhapa, Sindhuli, Chitwan, Nawalparasi, Rolpa,
Surkhet and Kailali) and copy such authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the Financial
Comptroller General and the District Treasury Controller o f seven districts. Fund release to the
Cantonment Offices will then take place through a normal release procedure through respective
District Treasury Controller Offices (DTCOs). The Secretary o f O C C C M will eventually be held
accountable for disbursements o f funds under Component 1. Similarly, for Component 2, the
Project Coordinator issues spending authorizations to the Chief District Officers (CDOs) o f 75
districts and copy such authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the Financial Comptroller
General and the District Treasurer Controller o f 75 districts. Fund release to the CDOs will take
place through a normal release procedure through respective DTCOs. The Project Coordinator
and CDOs are held accountable for expenses under Component 2.
Funds Flow Arrangements

11.
GON will release the budget as per the approved work program for the project in three
tranches as per i t s fund release procedures. The budget approved by GON will be indicated in the
government’s budget (Red Book). Prior t o the approval o f the work program and budget, onethird release o f the previous year expenditures or projected expenditures for the first trimester,
whichever i s greater, will be made to the respective cost centers through the respective DTCOs.
Fund release for IDA’S share o f expenditures will be pre-financed through GON’s consolidated
fund. Upon approval o f the work program and budget, appropriate adjustments will be made
against the advance for the first trimester release. Subsequent second and third trimester releases
are based on performance reflected by the physical progress reports as required by Schedule 2 o f
the FPR.

12.
For reimbursement o f IDA3 share o f expenditures to GON’s consolidated fund, a Special
Designated Accounts will be established in Nepali Rupees at N B to facilitate quick payments o f
R
various activities under the project including the reimbursement under terms and conditions
acceptable to IDA. M O P R will designate the signatories t o operate the special designated
accounts, and it will normally be the Project Coordinator and the Accounts Officer. Transactionbased (traditional) disbursement procedures will be applied for withdrawal o f funds from the
grant. Reporting formats for the Implementation Progress Report (IPR; comprising physical
progress report, financial monitoring report and procurement management report) will be
prepared, discussed and agreed with the Bank prior to negotiations.
Project Financial Accounting, Reporting and Internal Controls

13.
In order t o ensure that project financial statements are consolidated, the PMT in M O P R
will ensure that separate books o f accounts are maintained for the project and accounts are
prepared on a cash basis. The P M T will coordinate overall activities and work under the
guidance o f the M O P R Secretary and the PC. The P M T will be accountable t o prepare trimester
IPRs and project financial statements. Accounting information will be regularly updated to
timely generate financial reports. As required by government system, M O P R will maintain
required ledgers including the Withdrawal Monitoring Register and Special Designated Accounts

31

Ledger. GON’s internal control system will be applied to monitor the progress o f the project in
accordance with sound accounting practices. The accounting systems contain the following
features: (i)
application o f consistent cash accounting principles for documenting, recording, and
reporting i t s financial transactions; (ii) well-defined chart o f accounts that allows meaningful
a
summarization o f financial transactions for financial reporting purposes; (iii)
maintenance o f
withdrawal monitoring register, the record o f SOEs and Designated Accounts register; (iv) the
asset register; (v) monthly closing and reconciliation o f accounts and statements; and (vi) the
production o f annual financial statements.

Financial Management Staffing

14.
The PMT in MOPR will be the overall coordination office t o coordinate the overall
implementation and day-to-day management o f project activities. An Accounts Officer has been
designated to maintain the accounts o f the Project. H e will be supported by his assistants. As
two o f the three components are “one-off” cash transfers, the current team o f staff i s capable o f
handling the project transaction.
Internal Control on Cash Transfers

15.
Once the funds are released to the Cantonment coffers in the seven districts through the
respective DTCOs for Component 1 (payments to Maoists in cantonments), a modification in the
current system i s warranted in order to ensure that cash transfers take place to the intended
beneficiaries. Transactions would be made only through checks in the name o f individual
beneficiaries as per the approved l i s t o f eligible Maoists in cantonments by using the services o f
banks with a network in the cantonment locations. Checks would not be transferred unless a
GON representative from the cantonment management office and Maoist representative certify
the eligibility o f payments as per the agreed norms. It would also be required that an independent
third party witness the payment process, with GON and the Maoist leadership t o agree on and
with such third party which is also acceptable to IDA. The agreement between the GON Maoist
representatives and the third party would need to elaborate the scope o f the third party’s role in
“witnessing the payments” which ensures a standard process for the role o f the third party
witness. Documents based on which checks would be issued are the approved Attendance Roster,
vouchers generated for payments to each individual and checks prepared based on such approved
vouchers. Where feasible, beneficiaries will be encouraged t o open individual savings accounts
so that payments can be made directly to their savings accounts. GON has entered into dialogue
with the government owned banks t o facilitate the process. Arrangements will be made for
mobile banks to provide services in a specified date in each cantonment. Maoists in cantonments
would encash their checks through mobile banking. Banks will check the identity o f each
individual, verify the check, and obtain receipts o f checks and payments from each individual.
For Component 2 (payments to families o f deceased people), the Chief District Officer (CDO)
will be accountable to verify and attest the receipt o f payments made t o the identified
beneficiaries. One-off cash transfers in this case will also be made through banking arrangements
through checks, preferably, in the individual savings accounts if not, through demand checks.
Internal Review o f Cash Transactions

16.
In order to ensure that cash transfers are made to the intended beneficiaries, arrangement
for timely review o f such transactions will be made by the MOPR through use o f the
consulting/auditing firm t o verify that payments are made through set norms t o confirm that
evidences o f payments can be tracked through the system. MOPR will carry out such review in
close consultation with IDA three times a year after the end o f each trimester. The first o f such

32

review would be carried out within three months after the effectiveness o f the Grant when the
funds under retroactive financing would have been disbursed.
Internal Audit

17.
District Treasury Controller Offices (DTCOs) will be responsible t o carry out internal
audits o f this operation as all fund release are made through respective DTCOs for both
Components 1 and 2. Internal audits will be carried out on a trimester basis. DTCOs submit their
internal audit reports t o respective cost centers, copies o f which are sent t o M O P R and FCGO.
Implementation Progress Report (IPR)

18.
The interim financial report o f the project I P R will report total investments to be
separated by specific component/activity so that total investments as envisaged can be tracked
and monitored. The project I P R will be prepared from outset, showing the sources and uses o f
funds, output monitoring report, procurement management report and narrative progress report in
formats to be agreed upon during negotiations. T o match the public sector planning and reporting
cycle, the I P R will be produced on a trimester basis and submitted within 45 days from the end o f
the preceding trimester.
External Audit

19.

The following are the audi? requirements under the project:

Annual consolidated project financial statements and Designated Accounts statements will be
audited by OAG, which is considered acceptable by IDA for this purpose, and submitted to IDA
within six months after the end o thefiscal year -January 15.
f

The following audit report would be monitored in the Audit Report Compliance system
20.
(ARCS):

Implementing
Agency
MOPR

Audit

Auditors

Project Financial
Statements (including
SOE Statement and
Special Designated
Accounts)

OAG

Audit Due Date

6 months after the end
o f fiscal year (January
15')

Financial Management Action Plan

21.
Action plans to strengthen the financial management capacity o f the project were agreed
between the Recipient and IDA and are summarized below:

21

Terms o f reference acceptable to IDA were discussed and agreed prior to Negotiations with OAG.
33

Financial Management Action Plan

Action
1. The Benefit Payment Operational Guidelines satisfactory
to the Association have been prepared and agreed among
relevant parties.
2. GON to execute a memorandum o f understanding with
each o f the Rastriya Banijya Bank, the Nepal Bank
Limited, and the Nepal Rastra Bank, as applicable,
setting forth implementation and internal control
arrangements for Benefit payments
3. Peace Commission - or alternative agreed multi-party
mechanism pending formation o f thepeace Commission
- acknowledges the information on payments made to
Maoists in cantonments and families o f deceased.
4. Agreement o n satisfactory guidelines for cash payments
to families o f deceased, including payment into bank
accounts o f the beneficiaries.
5. Approval o f Directives on Norms for Financial Support
and Relief to the families o f those killed in the conflict.
6 . Develop and agree on the TOR for audit.

7. Develop and agree o n the formats for IPRs and Project
Financial Statements.

Responsibility Completion Date
MOPWGON, in
Prior to
consultation with disbursement for
Maoists and third
Component 1
party witness
GON and banks
Prior to
disbursement for
Component 1

Peace
Commission or
alternative

Disbursement
Condition for
Component 2 (2)

M O P R and M O F

Prior to
disbursement for
Component 2 (1)
Approved March

Cabinet

2008
MOPR, OAG
and IDA
DOI, DOA and
IDA

Completed
Completed

8. Carry out ex-post review through special arrangements in
MOPR in
Within 3 months of
coordination with the government o f cash transactions
consultation with project effectiveness
IDA
that are made following cash transfers at the one-third
when retroactive
level.
financing would
lave been disbursed
Covenants

22.
There are three FM-specific covenants: (i)
submission o f annual audited project financial
statements; (ii)
submission o f IPR each trimester; and (iii)
annual work program and budget for
each component would be shared with IDA.
Disclosure o f Information and Corporate Governance

23.
With recent enactment o f the Rights to Information Act, 2007, disclosure requirements
will be complied with to make information transparent and all information readily available for
public disclosure. M O P R will post in i t s website all available guidelines, procedures, and other
key information related t o peace process. M O P R has specifically agreed to disclose the following
through i t s website: Overall Peace Support Budget, Allocation by Activity and Budget Line;
Details o f Cash Transfers; Trimester Implementation Progress Reports (approved versions); and
Annual Audited Financial Statements. At the decentralized level, payments made t o Maoists in
cantonments would be displayed in the bulletin boards o f Cantonment Offices, and in case o f

34

payments made to families o f deceased under Component 2, such informationwill be displayed at
the bulletin boards o f CDOs.
Supervision Plan

24.
Project implementationprogress will be closely monitored by MOPR and IDA. IDA will
supervise project implementation for the purposes o f supervision on fiduciary aspects o f both
procurement and financial management. IDA will ensure to closely coordinate with other
development partners supporting the peace process. The PMT in MOPR will report on project
implementation progress through a trimester report, the IPR. The agreed action plan will be
closely monitored to ensure appropriate actions are being implemented. Key F M fiduciary work
includes: (i)
ex-post review o f cash transfer transactions; (ii)
reviews o f implementationprogress
reports and audit reports and preparing summaries of such reports; and (iii)
participating in
supervision missions and keepingthe team informed of FM issues or improvements.
Disbursement
Allocation o grant proceeds (Table C)
f

25.
Disbursement under proposed grant will be made as specified in Table C, which indicates
the percentage o f financing for different categories of expenditures of the project. The total
project cost i s estimated at US$50.0 million, to be fully contributed by IDA. I t i s expected that
the allocations under Components 1 and 2 will be disbursed over a period of approximately sixeight months from effectiveness, and the total amount will be disbursed over a period o f three
years. The Closing Date o f the Grant i s June 30, 2011.

Category

Amount o f the Financing
Allocated (in SDR)

Percentage o f Expenditures
to be Financed (Inclusive of
Taxes)

11,240,000

100%

(1) Benefit payments under
Component 1 of the Project
(2) Benefit payments and
Reintegration-Support under
Component 2 o f the Project
(a) Benefit Payments

14,230,000

(b) ReintegrationSupport

3,130,000

(3) Goods, consultants’
services, training, workshops
under Component 3 of the
Project, and operating costs
under Components 1,2 and 3
o f the Project
TOTAL AMOUNT

2,700,000

100%

31,300,000

35

100%

Disbursement Arrangements

26.
Disbursements from IDA will be made in accordance with traditional disbursement
procedures, including full documentation for contracts above the Prior Review threshold or SOEs.
T o facilitate disbursements, a Designated Account in Nepali Rupees will be established. For all
payments, including cash transfers, GON will pre-fund the activities, and disbursements from
IDA will be made v i a replenishments o f the Designated Account. For payments in foreign
currency under Component 3, if any, would be made through request for direct payments by IDA
to the concerned party.
Retroactive Financing

27.
T o facilitate speedy support to Maoists in cantonments and families o f deceased prior to
project effectiveness, the Project would allow retroactive financing in the amount o f up to US$20
million equivalent (ie., 40 percent o f the IDA grant amount, in line with OP 8.00 rules) for all
benefit transfers that occurred after July 2007 and follow the disbursementRM procedures agreed
under this project to ensure eligibility o f expenditures.
Use of Statement of Expenditures (SOEs)

28.
SOEs will be used for following expenditures: (i) cash transfers under components 1
all
and 2; (ii) training, workshop and study tours; (iii) incremental operating costs; (iv)
all
all
contracts for equipment and vehicles, costing less than US$lOO,OOO equivalent per contract; (v)
contracts for services o f consulting f i r m s costing less than US$ 50,000 equivalent per contract;
and (vi) contracts for services o f individual consultants costing less than US$25,000 equivalent
per contract. During the IDA initial supervision, the mission will closely review the SOE claims
to ensure that the funds are utilized for the intended purposes. Any ineligible expenditure
identified during this and subsequent reviews will need to be refunded to IDA.
Designated Accounts

29.
A separate Designated Account in Nepali Rupees will be established, on terms and
conditions satisfactory to IDA. The authorized allocations for the Designated Account under the
Grant will be NRs. 300,000,000. For the utilization o f IDA’Sshare o f project expenditures, the
P M T in M O P R may open and maintain the Designated Accounts in Nepali Rupees at the Nepal
Rastra Bank under terms and conditions acceptable to IDA. The Designated Accounts will be
managed under the joint signatures o f the Project Coordinator and the Accounts Officer.

30.
The P M T will ensure that the bankhash books are reconciled with bank statements every
month. P M T will separately submit replenishment applications for the Designated Accounts on a
monthly basis, or when 25 percent o f the authorized allocation has been used, whichever occurs
first. Replenishment applications will be accompanied by reconciled statements from the bank in
which the account i s maintained, showing all Designated Account transactions. Supporting
documentation will be maintained by the respective cost centers for at least one fiscal year after
the year in which the last disbursement from the grant took place, and will be available for review
by IDA staff and independent auditors.

3 1.
An aggregate cash transfer beneficiaries and total actual receipt amount will be submitted
on a Statement o f Expenditures for IDA’S reimbursement o f cash transfers t o the Designated
Account.

36

Attachment 1
Financial Management Risk Rating Summary
Risk
Previous
Assa
Risk
Risk Mitigating Measures

Residual
Risk

INHERENT RISKS
H

Country level
- Quality o f P F M institutions
(see PEFA-PMF,CFAA, CPAR,
CPIA and other diagnostics),
standard o f financial accounting,
reporting and auditing, quality o f
FM profession.
Entity level
- Independence o f entity’s
management, appropriateness o f
the organizational structure,
impact o f civil service rules
Project level
- Relative size o f the Bank loan,
type o f lending instrument,
complexity o f the project (e.g.
sectors involved, number o f
implementing and sub
implementing entities, multidonor etc.)
0 VERALL INHERENT RISK

H

Implementation o f CFAA,
CPAR action plan; PFM
sector work and
implementation o f actions;
country dialogue

Improvement Action Plan

M

S

Full placement o f staff at
PMT

Implementation
o f Action Plan

M

Assign separate budget code
and allocation o f budget for
FY2008/09
Development o f a separate
books o f accounts for the
Project and maintain in the
computerized spreadsheet in
Excel or appropriate software
Segregation o f duties and
monitoring o f procedures

L

CONTROL R I S K S

Budget

M

Accounting

M

Internal Controls

M

Funds flow
Financial Reporting

M
S

Auditing

S

37

L

L

L
Develop an excel spreadsheet
to capture financial
information.
Better coordination through
the MOPR

S

M

Risk
Previous
Assessment
Risk
H 1 S 1 M L Assessment
I

Risk Mitigating Measures

1

Residual
Risk

M

OVERALL CONTROL RISK

1

5

4

0

S

S

RESIDUAL RISK RATING

H- High

S - Substantial

M - Modest

38

L - Low

I

Annex 5: ProcurementArrangements
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project
GeneraI

1.
Procurement for the proposed project would be carried out in accordance with the World
Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits” dated M a y 2004 as
revised as o f October 2006; and “Guidelines: Selection and Employment o f Consultants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated M a y 2004 and revised as o f October 2006, and the provisions stipulated
in the Legal Agreement. The general description o f various items under different expenditure
categories are described below. For each contract to be financed by the Loadcredit, the different
procurement methods or consultant selection methods, the need for prequalification, estimated
costs, prior review requirements, and time frame are agreed between the Borrower and the Bank
project team in the Procurement Plan. The Procurement Plan will be updated at least annually or
as required to reflect the actual project implementation needs and improvements in institutional
capacity.
Project Procurement Arrangements

2.
The following procurement arrangements are proposed for the Nepal Emergency Peace
Support Project. The Project Coordinator o f the Project Management Team has good experience
and training in procurement (having undertaken the Turin-based procurement training course
successfully). Additional procurement resource will be drawn upon o n a consultancy or on
deputation as and when procurement function i s envisaged for substantial inputs. The dedicated
procurement function could be expected to become close to full time as the technical assistance
activities under the project expand, and especially as and when the Reintegration Support
activities under Component 2 gain momentum.

3.
Given the rapid project preparation under OP 8.00 and the need for greater clarity on the
specific activities to be undertaken within the Reintegration Support activities sub-component
during the first year o f implementation, it i s anticipated that the Bank’s Senior Procurement
Specialist (based on New Delhi Office) will assist the Implementing Agency and Bank team in
ensuring that procurement and consultant selection procedures and criteria for service provision,
training and related activities under that sub-component are agreed in detail prior to initiation o f
procurement o f such services.
4.

Procurement o f Works: There i s no works procurement under this Project.

5.
Cash Payments: Cash payments to be made directly to Maoists in cantonments and
families o f those killed during conflict under Components 1 and 2 are not subject to procurement
procedures.
6.
Procurement o f Goods: Goods procured under this project would include I T equipment
and solutions (computers and peripherals, software, customized M I S ) that i s t o be procured
through N C B by the Project Management Team located in the Ministry o f Peace and
Reconstruction.

39

7.
In addition, there will be some small value procurement o f miscellaneous goods (office
equipment and furniture), printing (of dissemination material), etc., that shall be carried out by the
Implementing Agency through N C B or shopping procedures.
8.
N C B procedures to be used will be in accordance with national procedures as defined by
the Public Procurement L a w and i t s related Regulations, and using bid documents reviewed by
and agreed with the Bank.
9.
Consultants: For contracts with consulting firms/institutions valued below US$lOO,OOO
equivalent per contract (under Component 3 and the Reintegration Support sub-component o f
Component 2), the methods o f selection may either be QCBS, consultant's qualifications or
Single Source Selection based on the appropriateness o f the procedures relevant to the
requirements.
10.
For contracts with NGOs and CBOs estimated to cost less than the equivalent o f US$
200,000 per contract (under the Reintegration Support sub-component o f Component 2), the
selection methods may be either Consultants Qualifications or Single Source Selection. For
Individual consultants, no contract shall exceed US$200,000 equivalent per contract.

11.
For consultancies estimated to cost US$200,000 or less, the shortlist can comprise
entirely national consultants in accordance with the provisions o f paragraph 2.7 o f the Consultant
Guidelines. GON would also be i s encouraged to identify a "pool o f experts" or a l i s t o f "preselected" consulting firms/ individuals that may be appropriate for supporting the PMT, similar in
concept to an indefinite Delivery Contract.
Training

12.
Non-consulting services under the project will include delivery o f seminars, training and
limited study/exposure tours and shall be obtained from local service providers through request
for proposals using a lump sum format o f contract or shopping.
Procurement Capacity o f P M T

13.
The Project Coordinator o f the PMT has hands-on experience o f implementing
procurement in a Bank-funded project, as well as extensive prior experience in procurement
according to Government systems. H e has also undergone training on Bank procurement
procedures at I L O in Turin. In addition, given the need for dedicated procurement capacity, a
procurement officer will be brought in who has Bank procurement accreditation, and the Bank
and M O P R shall agree o n such other remedial measures deemed necessary to ensure the capacity
i s adequate. This will be assessed by a more detailed procurement capacity assessment, which
will be initiated in the nearest future and prior to Board consideration.
Review requirements

(i)Post review o f sub-projects: At the end o f the first year o f the project, an independent
agency shall be hired by the Implementing Agency to carry out post review o f Procurement
carried out on a sample basis - the sample size being 10 percent o f contracts. In addition, to
strengthen transparency, there would be public disclosure requirements for procurement
actions (e.g., publication on M O P R website or other measures to be agreed at Negotiations).

40

(ii)
Any I C B contracts, each contract for goods estimated to cost US$lOO,OOO equivalent and
above, any shopping contract estimated at US$50,000 equivalent and above, and all single
source/direct contracts estimated at US$20,000 equivalent and above shall be subject to prior
review.
(iii)Each contract for consulting services with f i r m s following QCBS, QBS or other
competitive selection estimated at U S $ 100,000 equivalent and above; all contracts procured
using CQ or single source selection methods that are estimated at US$ 50,000 equivalent and
above, and all contracts with individuals valued at US$15,000 equivalent and above shall be
subject to the Bank’s prior review.

Simplified Procurement Plan

14.
Following i s a Simplified Procurement Plan (SPP) as per requirements o f O P B P 8.00
which covers the first months o f project implementation. A more detailed Procurement Plan will
be developed in this period and subsequently be subject t o the usual requirements for
procurement planning under Bank projects.

Simplified Procurement Plan (Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project)
Prior o r
Postreview by

Pre- or

Expected
date of bid
0 enin

quali-

Domestic

Post

No

Post

ed Cost

No

Post

June 30,OS

Post

No

Post

Various

Contract Package
(A) GOODS

Computer equipment
Computers
Printers & UPSs
General Software
MIS/database software
Office Furniture
Desks
Chairs
Cabinets
Other misc. furniture

Communications
materials
Posters and Pamphlets
Radio spots
Printing o f documents and
materials
Sub-Total Goods

150,000

1

I

Shopping

50,000

100,000

NCB

1

Shopping

I

1
I

41

I

Post

I

July 30,08

Simplified ProcurementPlan (Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project)

Contract Package
(B) NON-CONSULTING
SERVICES

Local Peace Cmtes
Project Staff
Peace Commission and
other relevant personnel
Reintegration partner
oreanizations
- . -.- - - - - - Sub-Total NonConsultant Services

Estimated Cost
(US$)

Procurement
Method

300,000

Domestic
Preference

Prior or
Postreview by
Bank

Expected
date of bid
Opening

Yes

Post

Various

3oo,ooo
Prior or Post
Review by
Bank

Selection
Method

Estimated
cost (US$)

I Periodic impact assessments
I

Post

Lump sum
or
Shopping

Contract Package
(C) SERVICES

6

Pre- o r
Post
qualification

100,000

I

Prior

I

42

I

Expected
Commencement
Date

I
I

July 1,2008

Annex 6: Implementation and Monitoring Arrangements
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project
Implementation Arrangements by Project Components:

1.
The three project components are: (a) Cash payment t o Maoists in cantonments; (b) One
time cash payment to the family o f deceased and support for reintegration interventions for other
conflict-affected groups; and (c) Capacity building and institutional strengthening o f the Ministry
o f Peace and Reconstruction, and other institutions involved in the peace process, plus project
management. The implementing agency for all three components i s the Ministry o f Peace and
Reconstruction, under the oversight o f the Peace Commission once constituted.
2.
The MOPR has formed a Project Management Team (PMT) headed by the Project
Coordinator (Joint Secretary o f the Conflict Management Division) and comprised o f
representatives from other Divisions/Sections - Conflict Analysis and Policy Formulation
Division, Relief and Rehabilitation Section, Planning and Monitoring Section and Cantonment
Management Division. The Team includes a dedicated Accounts Officer and a part-time
Procurement Officer who will pull resources/consultants when required from the system when
specific procurement support i s required. For Component 1, the Project Management Team will
work through the Cantonment Management Section which has Cantonment Officers in seven
cantonment siteddistricts. For Component 2 cash payments, the Project Management Team will
work through the 75 CDOs which are authenticated authorized district offices which maintain
records o f families o f deceased people killed during the conflict. T o guide the M O P R and i t s
Project Management Team, the Peace Commission - once formed - would act as a high level
oversight institution on project activities as part o f i t s functions in overseeing the peace process.
Monitoring Arrangements:

3.
The Project will be implemented following normal government systems, making the
process transparent and budget vetted by the Parliament. This will ensure adequate control and
monitoring o f funds disbursed through the government’s budgetary system. The fund flow,
recording and reporting will be carried out through designated government institutions. The
budget authorization i s given by the Ministry o f Finance t o the Ministry o f Peace and
Reconstruction, which will be accountable to maintain project financial statements and reporting.
The Financial Comptroller General Office maintains the central level consolidated financial
information. The Supreme Audit Institute, the Office o f the Auditor General, will be accountable
to carry out independent external audit. The Auditor General reports t o the Parliament, and audit
findings are subject to external scrutiny by the Public Accounts Committee. All cash transfers to
identified beneficiaries are verified and vetted by: a) for cash transfers to Maoists in cantonments,
by a tripartite team; and, b) for cash transfers to the family o f deceased, by the respective district
verification committee headed by the Chief District Officer. The M I S will be developed in
M O P R under capacity building component to ensure strengthening o f i t s monitoring system.

4.
An important additional element o f monitoring under the project would be
surveys/studies to be carried out on beneficiaries o f both cash payments and reintegration
interventions. This would be used both to gain insights into the impacts o f these interventions,
but also to learn and inform adjustments in future programs o f GON, development partners, and
in the future possibly the Bank itself. In addition, for payments t o families o f those killed as a
result o f the conflict, there i s planned to be a role in monitoring the payment process for local
citizens o f good repute who can both oversee the payment process t o encourage transparency and
be a source o f advice to beneficiaries. These citizens may be in local NGOs or other groups.

43

Annex 7: Project Preparation and Appraisal Team Members
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project

Team Member

Role

Philip O’Keefe, SASHD
Roshan Bajracharya, SASPR
Bigyan Pradhan, SAFWM
Deborah Bateman, SACNA
Hiroko Imamura, LEGES

Co-Task Team Leader
Co-Task Team Leader
Senior Financial Management Specialist
Country Program Coordinator
Senior Counsel

2.
In addition to the core team members noted above, the project benefited from the inputs
o f country and thematic specialists in and outside the Bank in the rapid review and preparation
process, which accompanies an emergency operation prepared under OP/BP 8.00. These
included Markus Kostner, Sima Kanaan, and Laura Bailey (OPCTF); Ernest0 M a y (SASPF);
Christine Wallich, Brigitte Duces and Barbara Kafka (SARVP); Myrna Alexander (Bank
consultant); David Wood and John Norris (UNMIN); Bella Bird (DFID Nepal); the
representatives o f bilaterals on the NPTF advisory group; Djanabou Mahonde (UNICEF Nepal);
and others.

44

Annex 8: Documents in Project Files
N e p a l Emergency Peace Support Project
23 Point Agreement between Seven Party Alliance, December 2007.
Ghimire, M. Paper presented on behalf o f Government o f Nepal on Peace and Reconstruction
Policies and Needs to Donor Pre-Consultation, February 2007.

Government o f Nepal I D P Policy, February 2007.

IDA Interim Strategy Note for Nepal, January 22,2007. Report No. 381 19-NEP.
International Crisis Group. Nepal: Peace Postponed, December 2007.
Nepal Comprehensive Peace Agreement, November 2006.
Norwegian Refugee Council. Briefing Note on Internally Displaced People in Nepal.
World Bank Country Assistance Strategy for Nepal 2004-07. Report No. 26509-NEP.
World Bank - Status Update Note on Nepal Peace Support Operation. February 2008.
World Bank Nepal Poverty Assessment, 2007.
World Bank Cash Payments Guidance Note for Emergency Operations, October 2007.

45

Annex 9: Support of UN Agencies, Bilaterals and Others for Peace Process (as i t
relates to the Emergency Peace Support Project)
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project

DFID

DFID has helped to design the Nepal Peace Trust Fund and i s
currently the largest bilateral contributor, prioritized establishment
o f cantonments for Maoist combatants, elections and electoral
security, and resettlement o f Internally Displaced People. In
addition, DFID i s providing $3m o f direct support to the
construction o f Maoist cantonments, election preparation and the
mobilization o f national and international electoral observers.
DFID has also provided more than $4Sm towards strengthening
the UN Mission in Nepal, UNOHCHR, U N D P and UNICEF.

GTZ

GTZ has been active in some o f the cantonments to provide water,
through pipes using a pump from the source to the water tank or
simple gravity systems, and supporting P L A health workers. GTZ
also provided medicines to some o f the cantonments, together with
WHO.

Informal Sector Service
Center (INSEC)

INSEC i s a human rights organization that has exposed instances
o f human rights violations. During the conflict in Nepal, INSEC
maintained detailed records o f victims killed by State and Maoists
in connection with "People's Conflict" (13 Feb, 1996 - 3 1 Dec,
2006). In addition, records are kept on disappearances, abductions
and conflict induced displaced.

International Rescue
Committee (IRC)

IRC assists displaced and other conflict-affected communities in
Nepal. They are active in: the delivery o f integrated programs
targeted at assisting the demobilization and reintegration o f former
child combatants; the delivery o f quick-impact inputs to I D P and
conflict-affected households; the improvement o f field datagathering and information analysis capacity on displacement and
return; the building o f local capacity for child protection; the
strengthening o f local education services; and the reestablishment
o f primary healthcare.
IRC i s a lead agency in the C A A F A G working group headed by
UNICEF. IRC has been particularly important in the training o f
members as they begin their DDR programs with recently
demobilized children. I R C provides support to two o f the seven
cantonment sites operating interim care facilities and providing
reintegration services for children formerly associated with
fighting forces.

Norwegian Refugee
Council (NRC)

The NRC officially launched i t s 'Information, Counselling and
Legal Assistance (ICLA) project in Nepalgunj, Biratnagar and
Kathmandu in March, with the opening o f project offices in all the
three locations. The program provides legal aid, information and

46

eturn assistance to Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). The N R C
ollects data on the numbers, conditions and locations o f IDPs to

hare with the humanitarian community, and also drafts case
nanagement guidelines for recurring legal issues relating to
lisplacement, return and reintegration in Nepal. N R C also
upports the Government o f Nepal to draft Directives on
mplementation o f the new I D P policies.
JNDP

JNDP provided technical and administrative support to the 10
JNMIN verification units in the verification and registration
n-ocess o f Maoists in the seven cantonments. In addition, UNDP
ogether with UNMIN and UNICEF expect to provide support in
he discharge o f ineligible Maoists in the cantonments. For this
ictivity, UNDP will take the lead on discharging the ineligibles
who were over the age o f 18 before 25 M a y 2006.

2NFPA

JNFPA, together with GTZ, i s supporting the P L A health workers,
who are delivering health care (mainly curative services) in some
i f the cantonment sites. In addition, UNFPA has also deployed
loctors to some o f the cantonments in need o f personnel.

UNICEF

Shild protection officers from the UNICEF were involved in
verifying the details o f registered Maoists who were under the age
i f 18 before 25 M a y 2006. This process was coordinated by
UNMIN and included personnel from the UNDP. In addition,
UNICEF i s expected to provide support in the discharge o f
ineligible Maoists in the cantonments who were under the age o f
18 before 25 May 2006.
UNICEF and OHCHR support efforts to make cantonments
consistent with the rights o f children, and support the integration o f
children affected by the conflict through youth clubs and catch-up
education.

United Nations Mission in
(N
NepalUm

UNMIN i s a special political mission established in January 2007
to support the peace process in Nepal and continues i t s mandate
until 22 July 2008. UNMIN’s mandate includes: monitoring the
management o f arms and armed personnel o f the Nepal army and
the Maoists and assisting in the monitoring o f ceasefire
arrangements. To this end, UNMIN maintains a 24-hour presence
at all 7 cantonment sites. UNMIN also coordinated the two stage
verification and registration process o f Maoists in cantonments. In
addition, UNMIN will verlfy the payment o f allowances to the
eligible Maoists in cantonments, along with a representative o f
Government and the Maoists.

UNOPS

UNOPS has a project in place to contribute to the safe storage and
destruction o f all Explosive Remnants o f War (ERW) stored at
cantonment and satellite sites by the provision o f technical advice
to assist and support the Maoists.

47

JSAID/Office o f
rransitionalInitiatives
:OTn

JSAID/OTI has sought to support the peace process through the
Min o f Peace and Reconstruction in areas o f communications and
Taditation support for local peace committees. USAID has also
mecently awarded a 5-year $15 million contract to Winrock Int’l for
iSkills Development Project targeting conflict-affected youth.
This project will support literacy/life-skills, agriculture production
and vocational education training support for an estimated 62,000
people. O T I i s also supporting the National Democratic Institute
which provides technical assistance for the elections process.

WFP

WFP i s providing evidence-based analysis in the poorest and
I ’civil
conflict-affected districts o f Nepal to facilitate WNS
affairs monitoring activities; drive the UN consolidated response
for post-conflict reconciliation; and support the GON’s peacebuilding efforts. WFP also provides field level support to
UNMIN’s district based Civil Affairs officers and monitors.
WFP i s providing emergency food assistance to 1,265,600 conflictaffected people. The project, which began in July 2007, i s
expected to continue until June 2008. The objective o f the project
was to safeguard the lives and livelihoods o f conflict affected
persons and contribute to peace during the immediate post-conflict
period in Nepal. The project places special emphasis on
marginalized and vulnerable groups including women, children,
ethnic minorities and indigenous populations. WFP’s three priority
areas for intervention are: return and reintegration o f conflict
displaced persons; critical infrastructure repair and creation
through workfare schemes; and non-formal education support.

48

Annex 10: Statement o f Loans and Credits
Nepal Emergency Peace Support Project
Difference between
expected and actual
disbursements

Original Amount in US$ Millions
IBRD

IDA

Cancel.

Undisb.

0.00

100.00
50.00
42.60
60.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

100.00
50.00
42.60
60.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Second Higher Education
Avian Influenza Control
Education for All Project

0.00
0.00
0.00

60.00
18.20
110.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00

60.00
17.00
72.30

0.00
-4.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

2005
2005

NP. Economic Reform T A
Nepal Health Sector Program Project

0.00
0.00

3.00
50.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

1.60
18.20

5.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

PO83923
PO84219

2005
2004

Rural Access Improve. & Decentralization
N P Fin Sector Restructuring (Phase 11)

0.00

0.00

32.00
75.50

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

27.30
20.50

9.00
29.00

0.00
0.00

PO81968

2004

Poverty Alleviation Fund

0.00

40.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

15.90

0.00

0.00

PO71285

2004

Rural Water Supply & Sanitation Project

0.00

25.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

8.70

-5.00

0.00

PO71291

2003

N P Financial Sector Technical Assistance

0.00

16.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

7.90

28.00

0.00

PO43311

2003

POWER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

0.00

74.80

0.00

0.00

0.00

68.60

37.00

0.00

PO82646

2003

Community School Support Project

0.00

5.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3.77

0.00

0.00

PO50671

2002

NP: Telecommunications Sector Reform

0.00

20.40

0.00

0.00

0.00

8.70

41.00

0.00

0 00

782 80

0.00

0 00

0.00

ProjectID

FY

P105860
PO99296
PO95977
P107558

2008
2008
2008
2008

Purpose
PAF I1
Irrigation & Water Rural
Road Sector Development
Education For All Additional Financing

0.00
0.00
0.00

PO90967
P100342
PO74633

2007
2007
2005

PO93294
PO40613

Total,

SF

GEF

Orig.

Frm. Rev’d

0.00

0.00

NEPAL
STATEMENT OF IFC’s
Held and Disbursed Portfolio
In Millions o f U S Dollars
Committed

Disbursed

IFC

IFC

F Y Approval

Company

Loan

Equity

Quasi

Partic.

Equity

Quasi

Partic.

1996198

Bhote Koshi

1.89

0.00

0.00

0.00

1.89

0.00

0.00

0.00

1994

Himal Power

2 1.47

0.00

2.92

0.00

21.47

0.00

2.92

0.00

200 1

ILFC Nepal

-

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.00

1998

Jomsom Resort

4.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

4.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.30

2.92

0.00

27.36

0.30

2.92

0.00

Total portfolio:

27.36

Loan

Approvals Pending Commitment
F Y Approval

Company

Loan

49

Quasi

Partic

0.00

Total pending commitment:

Equity

0.00

0.00

0.00

