Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: AB3799
Nepal Peace Support Project

Project Name
Region
Sector
Project ID
Borrower(s)
Implementing Agency
Environment Category
Date PID Prepared
Date of Appraisal
Authorization
Date of Board Approval

SOUTH ASIA
Other social services (100%)
P110762
GOVERNMENT OF NEPAL
Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction, Government of Nepal
[ ] A [ ] B [X] C [ ] FI
April 3, 2008
March 12, 2008
April 22, 2008

1. Country and Sector Background
Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world, averaging GDP per capita of US$270 in 2005, with
adverse, though in some cases improving, social indicators. Despite this, the country has made
substantial progress in poverty reduction in the decade to 2003/04, with the headcount rate falling from 42
to 31 percent. This is remarkable considering that an armed conflict ran from 1996 to 2006 which
imposed a heavy toll in terms of human lives: over 14,000 people were killed, many displaced (with
estimates over recent years ranging from around 25,000 to around 100,000 people), and others disabled or
“disappeared”. As such, unresolved tensions remain in many parts of the country.
In the past two years, a fragile peace has been sustained - though not without ongoing unrest and periodic
political setbacks – and important steps have been taken towards a “new Nepal”. This includes
establishment of the Seven Party Alliance (SPA) in November 2005 with involvement of the Maoists,
ending of royal rule in April 2006 and immediate establishment of an interim SPA Government, signing
of a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) between the Government of Nepal and the Communist
Party (CPN-Maoist) in November 2006 and subsequently CPN-M joined government in April 2007, and
promulgation of an interim Constitution in 2007. Elections are now scheduled for April 2008 for a
Constituent Assembly (CA) which would draft a new Constitution and be the basis for formation of a new
government. The CA elections had twice been postponed, the second postponement induced by a shortlived Maoist withdrawal from the coalition in late 2007. The Maoists re-entered Government following
the signing of the 23 Point Agreement (23PA) between the members of the SPA in December 2007.
A second set of developments over the past year has been considerable unrest - including bandhs,
intermittent violence (including killings), disruption of non-Madhesi political meetings, etc., – in the
Terai region by groups promoting the interests of Madhesi. However, at the end of February 2008,
agreements have been signed between GON and major Madhesi political blocs which should help to calm
such tensions. These agreements, however, will imply significant financial obligations for the incoming
government which will create additional pressure on fiscal resources.
Confidence is growing that CA elections will be conducted as planned on April 10, 2008 in a timely and
effective manner; just as importantly, the post-electoral period will open up a new set of challenges to the
peace and nation-building processes. These will require sustained confidence building between all

stakeholders. The most immediate will be the process of formation of a new Government which will
likely be a multi-party coalition with involvement of both sides to the conflict. Another challenge will be
meeting the wide-ranging commitments to different population groups which have been made in the
recent past. A final challenge facing Government will be the systematic and substantive review and
reform of the security system – in particular the political challenge of a proposed integration of the
Maoists in cantonments and the financial challenge of sustaining such an integration.
These and other challenges will require sustaining the existing level of confidence among different
political parties and deepening it over time in order to consolidate the peace and start the transition from
an emphasis on post-conflict to developmental policies. Meeting prior commitments that have financial
implications, particularly to the different groups affected by the conflict, will be critical to not only bolster
this confidence building and transition process; but also, protect the on-going pro-poor expenditures
initiated during the Tenth Plan.
The 23PA outlines several key agreements between the parties with respect to the ongoing peace process
which provide the specific context for the proposed operation. These include: (i) payment of outstanding
allowances to Maoists in cantonments, agreement to make future allowance payments, and to engage in
further deliberations on their reintegration following eventual release from cantonments; (ii) commitment
to provide compensation payments to families of those killed as a result of the conflict; (iii) provision for
rapid release and payment of allowances to those in cantonments who were not verified as eligible by
reason of being under age or having entered cantonment after a prior cut-off date; and (iv) commitment
that private and public property seized during the armed conflict will be returned to concerned individuals
and agencies. Primary responsibility for implementation of these commitments rests with the Ministry of
Peace and Reconstruction (MOPR).
The institutional architecture in GON for dealing with different aspects of the peace and reconstruction
process is summarized in the 23 Point Agreement. There is commitment to formation of several high
level Commissions tasked with guiding different aspects of the peace process. A key institution in this
respect is the High Level Peace Commission, intended to be a body with cross-party representation which
acts as the policy and oversight body with respect to the peace process. It is required under the 23PA to
coordinate closely with the Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction. The Commission is expected to be
formed in the near future. Apart from governmental institutions, a range of UN, international and national
agencies are supporting different aspects of the peace process. The coordinating agency among the UN
agencies is the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), a special political mission established by the
UN Security Council to support the peace process in Nepal and in particular to assist in the conduct of the
CA election in a free and fair atmosphere. A second important institution is the Nepal Peace Trust Fund
(NPTF) the coordinating mechanism for bilateral donors involved in supporting the peace process.

2. Objectives
The overall objective of the project is to contribute to the consolidation of the peace process in Nepal by
supporting: (i) Government to meet commitments to people affected by the conflict, including families of
the deceased, orphans, widows and disabled people, and Maoists in cantonments; (ii) ensuring
transparency in implementation of benefits under the Project for the conflict-affected groups including the
Maoists in cantonments; and (iii) strengthening of key institutions which are tasked with policy and
implementation functions in peace building, reintegration and rehabilitation.

3. Rationale for Bank Involvement

The rationale for Bank involvement has several elements in light of the request from GON for urgent
support. The first is that the Bank has considerable international experience in providing support to peace
processes, specifically dealing with conflict-affected populations and those who have participated directly
in conflicts. Secondly, the Bank’s strong local presence and significant resources allow for a speed and
level of project response not possible for many development partners. Thirdly, the procedures and project
management systems required by the Bank, and the expertise in public expenditure management (PEM)
among national Bank staff, are seen to contribute to enhanced transparency in public financial
management of peace-related expenditures. Finally, the existing involvement of the Bank in a range of
development related sectors relevant to the future integration of conflict-affected populations provides
significant potential for downstream linkages between the support under the proposed project and various
ongoing and planned developmental activities of the GON.

4. Description
The proposed grant would help finance the costs associated with commitments of the Government of
Nepal (GON) to post-conflict recovery interventions related to the peace process for identified groups.
The proposed support will help respond to the situation by: (i) financing agreed payments and
reintegration interventions to selected groups affected by the conflict, including families of those killed as
a result of the conflict, conflict-related widows and orphans, and disabled people; (ii) financing agreed
periodic payments to Maoists in cantonments in respect of implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord; and (iii) capacity building and technical assistance to GON to perform its peace building,
reintegration and rehabilitation functions in the post-conflict period.

5. Financing
The proposed project size is USD 50 million, equivalent in SDR, to be provided as an IDA grant with 100
percent financing of eligible project expenditures under the Grant. The expected period of
implementation is around three years, with the closing date proposed as June 30, 2011.

Source:
BORROWER/RECIPIENT
IDA Grant
Total

($m.)
0
50
50

6. Implementation
Institutional arrangements
The institutional arrangements for project implementation would be as follows. At the highest level, it is
expected that the PC – once formally established – would act as a high level oversight institution on
project activities as part of its broader functions in overseeing the peace process. Pending PC
establishment, an interim oversight mechanism would be necessary, most likely under the Steering
Committee of the NPTF or such other inclusive mechanism as otherwise agreed with GON. Beneath this,
the MOPR would be the primary implementing agency for the project, with the PMT located in the
Ministry under the overall supervision of the Commission and the interim oversight mechanism pending
its formation. The MOPR has formed a Project Management Team (PMT) headed by the Project
Coordinator (Joint Secretary of the Conflict Management Division) and comprised of representatives
from other Divisions/Sections – Conflict Analysis and Policy Formulation Division, Relief and
Rehabilitation Section, Planning and Monitoring Section and Cantonment Management Division. The
Team will include a dedicated Accounts Officer and a part-time Procurement Officer who will pull
resources/consultants when required from the system when specific procurement support is required. For
Component 1, the PMT will deliver cash benefits through the Cantonment Management Section which

has a Cantonment Officers in each of the seven cantonment sites/districts. For cash payments under
Component 2, the PMT will work through the 75 Chief District Officers (CDOs) which are heading the
authorized district offices which maintain records of families of people killed as a result of the conflict.
A second institutional issue relevant to project implementation is the potential linkages to the NPTF. The
NPTF has to date been an off-budget fund since its establishment in 2007. Key development partners
have expressed a desire for the Bank under this project to ensure close coordination with the NPTF and
explore possibilities for further harmonization once the NPTF comes on budget. Consistent with the Paris
Principles of Aid Effectiveness, the Bank, GON and development partners agree that harmonized and
coordinated approach is desirable and have been exploring how to operationalize such a relationship
while also ensuring compliance with the Bank’s fiduciary requirements.
Harmonization of the project and NPTF activities involves several aspects, including harmonization of
strategic planning, of the financial management and implementation mechanisms, of reporting and
monitoring and of institutional arrangements. The Bank has already initiated discussions with GON and
NPTF development partners on how harmonization can be promoted, and there appears to be agreement
on modalities. Firstly, mutual sharing of information and plans of the Bank and other development
partners will be deepened through the NPTF mechanism in order to ensure complementarity of peace
support efforts. This will be particularly important for the project TA and reintegration support activities,
where early and sustained discussion of strategic priorities for donor support is essential to avoid
duplication of effort. Harmonizing reporting of project and NPTF activities is also possible, and it is
proposed to have the project’s financial and performance reports included in the four monthly technical
and financial reporting of NPTF. With respect to financial management and funds flow mechanisms,
when the NPTF comes on budget, and assuming that the revised NPTF procedures are fully compliant
with regular GON budgetary systems, the GON, development partners and the Bank would aim to design
a better integrated fund flow system, bringing the two mechanisms more closely in line in the coming
fiscal year. There would in any event remain earmarking of Bank funding, given that some eligible
activities of the NPTF, e.g. related to elections, are not eligible for Bank financing.
Financial Management and Procurement
The proposed operation will use the normal government procedures followed by a normal budget line
item. The budgeting procedures for preparation, approval, implementation, and monitoring are elaborated
in the Financial Procedures Regulations (FPR). The annual work program and budget will be based on
the work program to be prepared by the MOPR. Annual work programs and budgets are submitted to the
National Planning Commission (NPC) and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) for discussion.
MOF will release authorizations for expenditure to MOPR. The Secretary of MOPR will issue
authorization to the Secretary of the Office of Central Coordination for Cantonment Management
(OCCCM) for Component 1 and to the Project Coordinator for Components 2 and 3 for disbursement of
funds. The Secretary of OCCCM will issue spending authorizations to the Cantonment Officers located
in seven districts (Jhapa, Sindhuli, Chitwan, Nawalparasi, Rolpa, Surkhet and Kailali) and copy such
authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the Financial Comptroller General and the District Treasury
Controller of seven districts. Fund release to the Cantonment Offices will then take place through a
normal release procedure through respective District Treasury Controller Offices (DTCOs). The
Secretary of OCCCM will eventually be held accountable for disbursements of funds under Component 1.
Similarly, for Component 2, the Project Coordinator would issue spending authorizations to the Chief
District Officers (CDOs) of 75 districts and copy such authorization letters to the MOPR Secretary, the
Financial Comptroller General and the District Treasurer Controller of 75 districts. Fund release to the
CDOs will take place through a normal release procedure through respective DTCOs. The Project
Coordinator and CDOs are held accountable for expenses under Component 2.

The Project Management Team has good experience and training in procurement and will have a
dedicated procurement officer. The bulk of project financing is for cash transfers, which are not subject to
procurement considerations. There is no civil works procurement under this Project. For the goods,
training and consultancy services anticipated, packages are not expected to exceed the relevant
procurement thresholds which would require complex procurement methods. The limited goods
purchased would be done according to national shopping procedures, as the goods are expected to be
readily available off the shelf or standard specification commodities. Non-consulting services under the
Project will include delivery of seminars and selected training shall be obtained from local service
providers through request for proposals using a lump sum format of contract or shopping. Consultancy
services will be procured according to national shopping procedures in cases where firms are required to
provide the service, and according to Section V of the Consultant Guidelines for selection of individual
consultants. Short lists of consultants for services estimated to cost less than $200,000 equivalent per
contract may be composed entirely of national consultants in accordance with the Consultant Guidelines.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M & E):
No formal impact evaluation of the Project is proposed, though the project team would conduct periodic
monitoring of performance based on the agreed performance indicators, and TA funds are proposed to be
allocated for conducting studies during project life to assess the situation of different conflict-affected
groups and implementation of project activities.
Management Information System (MIS):
An effective MIS is a critical management tool to register and monitor the target group beneficiaries, as
well as program implementation progress and effectiveness. Furthermore, a solid MIS can provide
monitoring data, track utilization of project funds and enhance financial management. TA is provided for
under the project to strengthen the MIS of MOPR on peace-related activities of GON and for periodic
surveys to monitor progress.

7. Sustainability
As an emergency project, there is not as strong an emphasis on sustainability of support as in typical
projects. However, the project has components on both capacity building for institutions involved in the
peace process and on reintegration support for conflict affected groups which should contribute to the
medium term goal of a more sustainable peace (at the societal level) and more sustainable life
opportunities (at the household level).
8. Lessons Learned from Past Operations in the Country/Sector
The Project has benefited from lessons learned on similar operations in post-conflict settings focusing on
supporting peace processes and prepared under OP/BP8.00 procedures. The team drew on Bank-wide
expertise and included a member who has worked extensively on similar operations in African postconflict settings. Some of the lessons reflected in design include: (i) keeping project design relatively
simple and focused on interventions where national capacity is felt to be adequate; and (ii) application of
fiduciary arrangements, particularly with respect to financial management, which reflect lessons of the
Nepal portfolio and similar cash payment operations in other countries. This includes reliance on
dedicated budget line item for fund transfer, a robust beneficiary identification process preferably with
third party involvement in witnessing the payments, and a planned payment process which involves both
Government and Maoist input and oversight. Other lessons drawn upon from similar operations include
ensuring high-level policy guidance for project activities, allowing sufficient flexibility in project design
to adapt to changes in policy and implementation environment, and relying on existing systems and
institutions to ensure reasonably rapid execution. Finally, despite the short-term focus of the project, the

project team has also included interventions with a longer term benefit in order to help sustain some of the
impacts.

9. Safeguard Policies
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)*
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)

Yes
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]
[]

No
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]
[X]

10. List of Factual Technical Documents
Nepal: Emergency Peace Support Project Emergency Project Paper (draft to be publicly available after
Board approval)
Nepal: Status Update on NEPS Project, Main mission, February 2008
IDA Interim Strategy Note for Nepal, January 22, 2007. Report No. 38119-NEP
NEPS Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet, April 2008.
11. Contact points:
Contact: Philip B. O’Keefe
Title: Lead Social Protection Specialist
Tel: (91 11) 24617241 - Ext. 357
Fax: (91 11) 24619393
Email: Pokeefe@worldbank.org
Location: New Delhi, India (IBRD)
Contact: Roshan Rajracharya
Title: Senior Economist
Tel: (977 1) 4226792 – Ext.110
Fax: (977 1) 4225112
Email: RBajracharya@worldbank.org
Location: Kathmandu, Nepal (IBRD)
12. For more information contact:
The InfoShop
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 458-4500
*

By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties’ claims on the
disputed areas

Fax: (202) 522-1500
Email: pic@worldbank.org
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop

